There is implanted in a holy man the earnest desire to learn,
which is partly natural and partly voluntary, and these qualities are equally clearly distinguished.
The holy man setteth up virtue, and he wisheth to instruct his neighbours by the (examples of) others who have lived from the earliest times, and who have given thanks to Him that hath done good unto us all from the beginning, that is to say, to our God and our Lord Jesus the Christ,
those whom He hath....................
I mean that not all have given thanks.
We are those (unto whom) He doeth good. And there are very many admonitions (or, teachings), and acts of valiant and blessed men which have come down to us in the Holy Scriptures, which are like unto images that have souls in them, and which will make those who wish to follow them resemble [them] in their glorious integrity, and prevent them from becoming feeble in the performance of their mighty deeds.
The men about whom I shall now write to you are men who maintained their virtuous deeds in our own time, and who did not slacken in their integrity and valiant behavior.
And there was in the kingdom of the Emperor Trajan, wherein the worship of idols had spread and prevailed,
a certain general whose name was Plaketas (Placidus) He was near of kin to the king, and he belonged to a very great and noble family, according to (the opinion) of this world, and he was exceedingly rich.
And he exceeded all the other nobles of the palace in his possessions, (in) gold, and (in) silver, and he had troops of slaves, and riches of all kinds in very great abundance;
and by race he was a Greek And he was adorned with all the works of righteousness.
Those who were in distress, he relieved.
And he had a wife who was herself a worshipper of idols,
but she was adorned with every excellent quality and virtue in exactly the same degree (as her husband);
and two sons were born to them,
and these they brought up to walk in the same good path as their parents.
And the man was exceedingly well known because of the good works which he was in the habit of doing,
and he was so celebrated for his personal strength and valour that the Barbarians were afraid at the mere mention of his name. For he was a fine fighter,
and he had gained great renown in battles of all kinds,
but his whole desire was to hunt and slay wild animals, and for this he was greatly esteemed.
But the Good God, who loveth every man who is worthy of Him in every place, did not forget the deeds of this good man,
neither did He wish to destroy his good disposition,
but even as it is written, 'Every heathen who feareth God, and who worketh righteousness, shall be accepted by Him,'
His bowels of compassion yearned towards him, and He was merciful towards him to such a degree that God willed to save his life, and He did so in the way and by the means which I will here declare unto you.
And it came to pass that on a certain day the man went out, according to his custom, to hunt wild beasts in the mountain,
he and his soldiers, and all his slaves were with him.
And there appeared unto him a herd of deer that were feeding,
And when Plaketas had seen him,
he wished to take him in a snare.
And he took with him certain soldiers, and hid away all the others, and he gave chase to the animal.
Now the soldiers who had gone with him became exhausted, and they gave up the chase, and Plaketas rode into the thicket alone in pursuit of the beast.
And by the good Providence of God neither he nor the horse on which he was riding became exhausted in that dense thicket.
And when he had persevered for some time in his pursuit, an was a very long way off from his companions,
then the beast stood still upon a very high mountain.
And when the general had approached him, he stood still and looked round about on every side,
and he wondered by what means he could take him in a snare.
And God, the Lover of mankind, Who effecteth the salvation of man in very many ways,
snared this (general) in His net, even as was snared Cornelius by Peter, and even as was Paul unto whom He appeared when he was persecuting Him.
And when a considerable time had passed, during which Plaketas had been looking at the stag, and marvelling at its great size and very fine appearance, and thinking out the means whereby he might capture it, the Lord gave him the following sign; and He made him able to see it,
and it appeared unto him in the following form.
There was a figure of a cross between the stag's horns,
and it shone more brightly than the sun,
and there was, moreover, between his horns a similitude like unto the body wherein God arrayed Himself in the womb of the Virgin;
now He clothed Himself in this body for our salvation.
And He cried out to Plaketas from the animal with the voice of a man,
saying, 'O Plaketas, why dost thou hunt Me?
For it is for thine own sake that I have appeared unto thee 'in the form of this animal.
 I am Jesus, He Whom thou servest, without knowing it.
Thy kind and charitable deeds which thou doest have come before Me.
Therefore I have Myself appeared unto thee,
and I have snared thee by means of this animal that is without reasoning power.
And I have netted thee with the nets of My Godhead.
It is not just to allow those who love Me by their good deeds to act as slaves to unclean demons, and idols which are dead, and dumb, and without feeling.
For this reason did I come upon the earth in the form wherein thou now seest Me, for I wish to deliver (or, save) the race of man.'
And when Plaketas heard these things he was terrified, and he fell down upon the ground.
And when a long time had passed, he rose up, wishing to understand with exactness the miracle which had taken place.
And he said, 'What then is the sight which I have seen?
And what manner of voice is this which I have heard?
Make Thyself manifest to me, O Thou Who speakest with me, and I will believe in Thee.'
When Plaketas heard these words he fell down upon his face and cried out, saying, 'I believe, Lord, that Thou art He Who hath created everything, and that Thou are He Who turneth back those who go astray,
and that Thou art He Who giveth life unto those who are dead.'
And the Lord answered and said, 'If thou believest, go, make thy way to the high priest of the Christians, and demand from him the freely-given gift of baptism.'
And Plaketas answered and said unto Him, 'Lord, command me to relate these words to my wife and children, so that they also may believe in Thee.'
And the Lord said unto him, 'Repeat them.
And ye shall be purified from every unclean thing When ye have received the seal of baptism thou shalt return hither, and I will appear unto thee, and I will declare unto thee the mystery of salvation.'
And Plaketas came down from the mountain,
and went into his house.
And when the evening had come he began to speak and tell his wife and sons about the things which he had seen in the vision, and how the Lord had appeared unto him.
And his wife cried out and said unto him, 'Lord, my brother, thou hast seen God Whom they crucified, Whom the Christians worship.
For He is the only true God, and it is He Who delivereth those who put their hopes in Him.'
And she cried out vehemently, saying, 'Have mercy upon me, O Lord Jesus the Christ, and upon my two sons also.'
And she said unto her husband, In the night which hath passed I myself also saw Him, and He said unto me, To-morrow do thou, and thy husband, and your sons come to Me.
Therefore come this very night, and let us go and receive baptism from the high priest of the Christians, even as thou wast commanded,
for by this do those who believe in Him become members of his household.'
And Plaketas answered, saying, 'This is what He Who appeared unto me commanded.'
And in the middle of that night they took their two sons secretly, and a few of their slaves,
and they went to the high priest of the Christians, and they told him all the dream,
and they confessed their belief in the Lord Jesus the Christ,
and they entreated him to give them the seal of the Christ by baptism.
And the high priest rejoiced, and ascribed glory to God Who wisheth all men to have life, and to come to the knowledge of the truth.
And the high priest took them, and catechized them, and gave into their hands the Holy Mysteries of the Faith, and he baptized them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
And to Plaketas he gave the name of Eusthathius, and to his wife Theopiste; his elder son he called Agapius, and the younger Theopistus;
and he gave them the Glorious Body and Blood of the Christ, and dismissed them,
saying, 'May God, the Christ, be with you,
and may He graciously grant unto you His kingdom for ever.
And know that the hand of the Lord is with you,
and I earnestly beseech you that when ye shall be in Paradise ye remember the soul of John, the least of all men and the most miserable.'
And when the morning had come Eusthathius took horses,
and he departed to the mountain, and went toward the spot wherein he had seen the vision.
And he dismissed his soldiers, and sent them away to hunt the wild animals,
and he remained where he was alone for a short time;
then he moved on,
and went nearer and nearer to the place where he had seen the figure at first.
And he cast himself down upon his face, and he cried out, saying, 'Lord, I know that Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God, and I believe in Thee and in Thy Good Father, and in the Holy Spirit.
And now I beseech Thee,
if I be worthy of the holy grace of Thy Godhead, declare unto me the things which Thou hast to say unto me.'
And straightway the Lord answered and said unto him, 'Blessed art thou, O Plaketas, because thou hast received the washing of grace,
and hast arrayed thyself in the indestructible garment which abideth for ever.
Now, therefore, do thou make manifest the work of thy faith.
Since the Devil is envious of thee thou must cast him behind thee;
and he will be zealous in setting snares of every kind for thee, and he will contend against thee.
For thou must of necessity endure manifold temptations.
If thou endurest them in patience thou shalt receive the crown of victory.
Behold, thou shalt rise very much higher in the works (or, affairs) of (this) life, and in the riches which are temporal.
And, moreover, thou shalt become rich in spiritual excellence.
Now be not weak, neither be thou overcome by the glory of this world, which thou didst possess originally;
but as thou didst shew thyself to be a mighty man among men, and as thou didst wage war, and didst strive zealously to serve a king who is mortal, even so do thou strive zealously to prove thyself to be a mighty man against the Devil, and do thou keep fast hold on the faith for Me,
And when the Lord had said these things unto him
He departed into heaven,
and the Lord spake unto him, saying, 'Eusthathius, there shall be unto thee as great a temptation as thou canst wish in that which thou shalt have in the last days.'
And Eusthathius said unto Him, 'If this be the last of my days, I now beseech Thee, O my Lord, supposing that I am not able to bear the things which Thou hast appointed me, to remoe them, and not to let them come upon me, and command that our temptation return unto Thee.
But give us strength, O Lord, Thou God of mighty deeds, for Thou are He in Whom we trust.'
And the Lord said unto him, 'Fight, O Eusthathius, and My grace shall watch over what is in (thy) heart.'
And Saint Eusthathius came down from the mountain,
and he went into his house, and told his wife the things which God had said unto him.
And they knelt down together on their knees,
and they prayed, saying, 'Let Thy will be done.'
And it came to pass, after a few days, that a pestilence broke out in the house of Eusthathius, and all his slaves died.
And when this had happened, Eusthathius perceived that there had actually come upon him the temptation (or, trial) which, according to the indications that had already been given to him, was to come upon him, and he welcomed it as such, and he rejoiced, and exhorted his wife not to lose courage.
And after a little while all his horses, and cattle, and sheep died,
and this temptation he also received with joy.
And it came to pass in those days that all the people were celebrating a festival, and they were rejoicing greatly because they had conquered the Persians,
and the Emperor was celebrating the festival with them with great heartiness,
but Eustathius felt that it was not seemly for him to join them in celebrating the festival.
As, however, he was a great general among the nobles of Rome, the Emperor enquired for him, but did not find him.
And when the Emperor learned that in one hour nothing had been left to him of all his possessions,
and that neither he nor those who were with him had anything left,
he and all the nobles with him were exceedingly sorry on his account,
and they marvelled at what had happened to him.
Then his wife said unto him, 'How long shall we sit here in this place?
Rise up, and let us take oiur sons who are left unto us, and let us depart and leave this country, because we have become the laughing-stock of those who know us.'
And that night they took their sons and departed, and they set out for Egypt.
And when they had been travelling for a day or two, they arrived at the sea,
and they found a ship anchored at the quay, and they made enquiries aboiut embarking in the ship.
And the captain of the ship was a savage and brutal man.
And when they had embarked in the ship they put to sea,
and the captain of the ship looked upon the wife of Eustathius, and he saw that her face was beautiful, and he loved her.
And when the captain arrived at the shore of the sea he asked Eustathius for his passage money, but he had it not to give to him;
and he seized the wife of Eustathius in place of the passage money,
for he had already determined that he would not let her go with her husband.
And when Eustathius persevered in arguing the matter with him, and in making supplication to him, the captain made a sign to the sailors to lay hold upon him, and to throw him into the sea.
And when Eustathius knew of their evil intentions he very unwillingly left his wife behind, and taking his two sons departed with them weeping,
and he made lamentation, saying, 'Woe is me, O my sons, for your mother hath been seized by a barbarian.'
And he went away heaving sighs and shedding tears, and he came to a river of water, and owing to the heavy rain which had fallen into it
he was unable to swim across it with both of his sons at the same time.
And he took the one son on his neck,
and leaving the other on this side of the river
he swam across the water, and left on the other side the son whom he had been carrying,
and then turned back (to fetch) the other.
And it came to pass that whilst he was in the middle of the river
And when certain shepherds saw the (one) child in the jaws of the lion and that he was uninjured,
they said with right understanding, The Providence of God is disposed to protect this boy,
and to help him, and it will deliver him from the wild beast.'
And they gave chase to the lion with their horses,
and the lion was afraid.
And by the dispensation of God the lion dropped the child from his mouth,
and fled, and the shepherds picked up the child, and they reared it as a son to them on the east of the river.
And as for the other son which the wolf had carried off
the good Providence of God preserved him also unharmed.
For when certain men who were ploughing the land saw him (being carried off) they gave chase to the wolf, and took him from the beast; and the child had received no injury whatsoever.
And the ploughmen and the shepherds were living together in the same village,
and they took the two little children, and reared them as their own.
Now Eustathius had no knowledge whatsoever of what had happened;
but he walked on his way, and he wept, and kept repeating these words, 'Woe is me!
I was at one time flourishing like a tree,
but now I am dried up and withered.
Woe is me! I, who at one time had legions of soldiers at my feet, am now left utterly to myself,
and neither my wife nor my children are permitted to be with me.
But do not, O Lord, cast me away,
and be not Thou forgetful of my tears.
O Lord, Thou didst say unto me, 'Needs must that thou shalt be tempted as was Job.'
And behold, do Thou look upon my sufferings which have become exceedingly severe.
For even if the possessions which he had were all carried away, there still remained to him the dung-hill whereon he could seat himself,
whereas I am a miserable sojourner in a strange land, and am burdened with all this mass of misery.
And even if his branches, I mean his children, were lopped off, he still had left to him the root, that is to say, his wife, who would live in the house with him, even though she did not serve him as a wife in the (true sense of) the word.
But as for me, miserable man that I am, my root is cut off on all sides,
and I cannot see a single ray of light from the lamp of my race.
Moreover, I am like a tree in the desert, which is being ever shaken by the winds of the Devil.
Do not, Lord, do not afflict Thy servant, (and drive him) to utter many words,
for if I spake the things which I ought not to speak, I should be grieved in heart.
Do Thou, therefore, O Lord, set a guard upon my mouth, and a strong seal upon my lips, so that my heart might not incline towards the words which are evil,
and Thou mayest not cast me away from before Thy face. And give Thou me rest, O Lord!'
And as he was saying these things, and was heaving sighs and weeping, he came to a village, which was called Bassos,
and he went into it, and worked there, and procured his daily bread therein.
And when he had lived there a long time the owners of the village entreated him to go and become watchman of the fruit crops in the orchard there, and he fullfilled this work for a period of ten years, and received his wages for the same.
And his sons were being fed and brought up in the village which we have already mentioned, and they did not know that they were brethren.
And the captain of the ship who had carried off the wife of Eustathius took her to his own country,
and the great shadow of God overshadowed her so completely that the barbarian was never able to touch her all that time.
For what this woman had entreated God to grant her was that a pagan man should not touch her at all.
The subject of this festival to-day is full of joy, for it is our holy father, who had put on Christ, Apa Pisentius, who was full of light; and who spread abroad a sweet odour at all times, not only during the day, but during the night also.
All the beasts which are upon the earth, and (all) the birds which are in the heavens rejoice, and move about gladly, and are happy this day because of the good and glorious news of him which hath reached them, according to what the words shall inform us, if we are able to proceed to the end.
I took an oath to keep silence and not to speak concerning thy righteous acts and judgements, because thou thyself didst flee from the adulations of men from the very beginning, when thou didst become a monk, and before thou didst become a bishop.
And indeed if we were all to be gathered together, each one having the opportunity of speaking, one would declare (the greatness of) his knowledge, and another his power of disputation, and another would proclaim his power of revealing hidden things; and thus it would happen that all the descriptions (of him) would be laudatory.
Saint James the Apostle cried out in his Catholic Epistle, saying, 'He who knoweth how to do what is good, and doeth it not, it is a sin unto him.'
Let us learn, moreover, who it was to whom the Apostle (Paul) referred in his words, I knew a man in Christ fourteen years ago,
but whether he be in the body I know not, or whether he be out of the body I know not, it is only God Who knoweth, (this man I say) was caught up into the third heaven.
And I knew such a man, but whether he be in the body (now), or whether he be out of the body (now) I know not, it is only God Who knoweth, (this man I say) was caught up into Paradise, and heard things which were hidden,
the which it is not lawful for man to utter.
Of whom then was the Apostle speaking if it was not Pisentius?
For all the saints have fled from the glory (or, adulation) of this world, and this did also our glorious father, Apa Pisentius, whom God hath made manifest to us in our own days.
He was a giver of light to the whole world.
He was salt which was purified for every one, according to that which is written in the Gospel, 'Ye are the salt of the earth.
Now if the salt hath become tasteless, wherewith shall they make it salt (again)?
And again, 'Ye are the light of the world.'
He hid his life and the works thereof, but God hath made manifest those who perform His will and commandments, generation after generation, according to that which is written,
God draweth nigh to every one who crieth out to Him in truth, and He doeth the will of every one who holdeth Him in fear, and He will hear their supplication, and will deliver them.'
Now if ye wish to know whether he hated the glory (or, adulation) which was vain, and whether he wished not for any to applaud him in any way or not, go into... and learn concerning him from the acts of his life and the manner in which he used to live.
Then he asked them, saying, 'Have ye any decided reason for coming into this region?'
And they answered, saying, 'In the first place, we set out in order to come to thee, and to pay thee a visit, and to receive thy
For had it not been for the cares of the world which have occupied us for several days past we should have passed thy way before this.
In the second place, we have a little business in this neighbourhood which we wish to arrange ; but do thou pray on our behalf, O father, that God may journey with us.
If God be pleased to permit us to do this we shall return to thee again, and we wiU salute (or, kiss) thee, and receive thy blessing before we return to our houses, if it be God's will.'
y sons, take ye good heed to yourselves in these villages.
Hold no intercourse with a woman who is bad.
Do not seize the ox of the poor.
If there be any man in this region who is indebted to you, do not treat him harshly, and do not attempt to force him to pay by legal means;
but watch what is in (his) mind, in order that God may shew compassion unto you.'
And they answered, saying, 'Pray for us, O our father.'
And they came away from his presence, and they acted (according to) his plan (or, way), and they gave glory to God because of the words of advice wherewith he had advised them.
And when they had come to him, they heard him reciting the words of Saint Jeremiah with great calmness and clearness,
and they sat down outside his place of abode for a little time, saying, 'It is not right, and the matter is not of such urgency as to make it seemly for us to cry out to the holy man inside until he hath finished reciting the Scriptures and praying
And when Pisentius had concluded the reciting of the Prophet Jeremiah, and had finished (his prayer), the two men rose up and knocked at the door, at the very moment when he began to (recite) the (Book of the) Prophet Ezekiel.
And they sat down, and did not cry out to Pisentius inside.
And finally he finished reciting the whole of the (Book of) the Prophet (Ezekiel), and he shut his mouth, for the evening had come.
And when the two men knocked at the door, Pisentius answered them, saying, 'Bless me.'
And he looked out upon them from a large window, and he spake unto them, saying, 'Did ye come to this place many hours ago?'
And they said unto him, 'We came here at dawn, but we did not dare to cry out to thee inside until thou hadst finished thy recital (of the Scriptures)
Then straightway Apa Pisentius wept, and smote upon his breast, and said unto them,' This day I deserve a very great punishment, and all the labours which I have performed are things of vanity.'
Now these things which the holy man spake (shew) that he fled from the vain adulations of men.
He was very sad at heart, but the two men knew that he was reciting (the Books of Jeremiah and Ezekiel).
Know ye therefore, O my beloved, that the saints crave for the glory of God only.
If ye will not (believe me), hearken unto the honey-sweet writer David who saith, 'I have desired Thy commandments;
look Thou upon me and have compassion upon me.'
And the truly wise man Paul cried out, saying, 'For we groan in this earnestly desiring to array ourselves in our place of abode which is from heaven.
Hearken also to this great miracle which took place by his I hands when he was a monk living in quiet contemplation in his cell and before he became a bishop.
He was suffering from his spleen on one occasion on the third day of the festival at the end of Easter,
but he did not make known to any one of the brethren that he was sick, but he sent them a message and said, 'Pray for me.
I am going to the monastery of Apa Abraham to visit the brethren who are in that place.
If the Lord be pleased to permit it I shall return to you.'
Now he spake in this wise because he did not wish to let any one know that he was seriously ill.
Now if any man shall ask in a spirit of contentiousness why the holy man said this,
let him read in the Book of Job the Blessed, and he will find that the Lord said unto him, 'I have not done these things unto thee for any other purpose except to make thee shew thyself to be righteous/
And Paul himself said, ' I have done all these things for the sake of the Gospel, that I might be to him a companion.'
Now when the holy man Apa Pisentius had been sick. for a whole week, and the brethren had made no enquiries after him, for they thought he was in a cave,
they held converse with each other, saying, 'Pisentius tarrieth somewhat over long, let us enquire about him.
Perhaps he hath fallen sick on the road, or perhaps some suffering hath afflicted him, and he is unable to walk.
And they sent a brother who was a priest to make enquiries about him.
Now when Pisentius had departed, according to the dispensation of God—now observe ye the wonderful acts of God—
all the days which he had passed lying on his bed sick, during which the holy men did not minister unto him, until the very day wherein the brother went to him...
Now when the brother went to him, he found the door of the little cell wherein he lived open.
And when the brother had waited for some time, he rose up and called out to (the dweller) inside, 'Bless me.'
Know ye then, O my beloved, that him that keepeth the commandments of monasticising, and fulfilleth them without sluggishness, doth the Christ love.
His holy ones do not speak to Him only, but they see God, each one in the vision which appeareth unto him, according to the form wherein He wisheth to make Himself manifest to them.
Now as concerneth Jacob the Patriarch. When Rebecca had heard the words of Esau, her eldest son, who was wroth with Jacob because of the blessing wherewith Isaac had blessed him, she cried out to him, and said unto him,
Behold thy brother (Esau) is older than thou, and the blessing wherewith Isaac, who is thy father, hath blessed thee (belongeth to him).
Now therefore, arise, and get thee gone into Mesopotamia of Syria, to Laban my brother, and do thou abide with him until the fury of the wrath of thy brother hath turned away from thee, lest peradventure I become childless in respect of both of you at once, and on the same day
And Isaac also commanded him (thus), and he came out (to) Jacob and set him on his way, saying, 'Depart into Mesopotamia'
And it came to pass that he arrived at a certain place, and he lay down (there); now the sun had set.
And when he had placed a stone under his head, he lay down and fell asleep, and that night he dreamed a dream.
And he saw a cloud fixed upon the earth, and the top thereof reached into the heavens;
and the angels of God were ascending and descending upon it.
Now God was standing upon it, and He made Himself manifest to Jacob ne on that night, and He spake with him.
Now when Jacob had gone into Mesopotamia of Syria, God spake again with him in the night season, saying, ' Lift up thine eyes and look with them, and thou shalt see that I will come to the white sheep,
and the (white) sheep shall be with the goats, and they shall bring forth young of variegated colours, and they shall be in colour like ashes, and (some) sheep shall be marked with stars (i.e. spots).'
And again God spake unto him in a vision of the night, saying, 'I am the God of Isaac; fear thou not.
Thou shalt certainly increase and multiply, and thou shalt fill the earth, and thou shalt become the lord thereof.'
And when God had blessed him with gold, and silver, and sheep, and goats, and cattle of every kind.
He spake again unto him, saying, 'Get thee back into thy house; I will be with thee.'
Now when the morning had come Jacob said unto him, 'Shew me thy name.'
And the man said unto him, 'Why dost thou enquire concerning my name?'
Now this is a most wonderful thing.
And the man said unto Jacob, 'Let me go, for the daylight is growing stronger.'
And Jacob said unto him, 'I will not let thee go whilst as yet thou hast not blessed me'
And the man said unto Jacob, 'What is the name which thou hast?'
And the man said unto Jacob, 'They shall no more call thee Jacob, but Israel, which is the name which thou shalt have; for thou hast prevailed with God, and thou (shalt be) mighty with men'
And the man touched the side of a member of Jacob, and that member became without feeling.
Then Jacob said, 'I have seen God face to face.'
My soul is delivered.' Now the sun was rising upon him when he passed the Image of God.
And, O my beloved, it is right that for us this should suffice.
If God deemed him worthy thereof, and came down into the world, and spake unto the creature which He had fashioned concerning his restoration with salvation of soul, how very much more will He not send His saints to comfort (His servants) in their sufferings?
Therefore let no man allow himself to be unbelieving concerning this matter which I have related unto him concerning the holy man Apa Pisentius the bishop, for he was worthy to see Elijah the Tishbite.
But do Thou help us, for Thou art able to help us by what Thou canst do; have compassion upon us.'
Jesus said unto him, 'Everything is possible for him that believeth.'
And the father of the young man cried out, 'I believe. Help thou mine unbelief.'
Then straightway (Jesus) rebuked the evil spirit, and cast him out from the young man because his father believed.
And again it was by the might of faith that a certain woman went to Him, whose blood had been flowing from her for twelve years, and whom no man had been able to heal.
She touched only the outer edge of His garment, and immediately her blood ceased to flow, and dried up.
Then He spake unto her, saying, 'It is thy faith which hath delivered thee; go in peace.'
And again He spake unto the disciples, saying, 'If ye have faith as large as a grain of mustard seed, ye shall say unto this mountain, Remove thyself from this place to that, and it shall remove itself, and there is nothing which shall be impossible for you.'
And again, if ye shall say to a sycamore tree. Separate thyself (from) the earth, and plant thyself in the sea, it shall hearken unto you.'
And moreover, it is said concerning the holy man Apa Pisentius, that it came to pass on a time when he was young, while he was pasturing his father's sheep, that God opened his eyes, and he saw a pillar of fire in front of him.
Now there were certain other young men who were pasturing sheep with him.
And he said unto the other young men who were pasturing sheep with him, 'Do ye see the pillar of fire on the road in front of us?'
Now since God came unto Apa Pisentius when he was a young man, He chose him even as He did Samuel, whose mother had given him to the temple of God according to her vow, even as the holy Psalmist saith, 'Moses, the holy man, and Aaron among His priests, and Samuel among those who called upon His Name.
They cried out to God, and He heard them, and He spake unto them out of the pillar of cloud, and they kept His testimonies, and the ordinances which He had given unto them.
Then the holy man Apa Pisentius himself took his water-pot to fill it with water, for it was the time for filling (the water-pots with) water.
And whilst Apa Pisentius was filling his water-pot, according to what he confessed to us with his own mouth, and testified to us, he I captured the fish, and (when) he gave it to the brother he said unto him, 'God hath fulfilled thy petition
it was He Who sent the meal to Daniel, for which his heart waited.
He said, 'It is He moreover Who hath prepared the fish for thee this day by His wish, inasmuch as He would not allow thee to suffer grief in respect of that for which thou didst ask at His hand.
Well and truly doth the Prophet say, God is nigh unto every one, and He directeth him in truth.
And He will hearken unto their supplications, and will deliver them.
God shall guard every one who loveth Him.'
When the children of Israel had risen up against Moses and Aaron, they said unto him, 'What is this that thou hast done with us?'
Thou hast brought us forth from the land of Egypt.
We used to sit down by the brazen pots of flesh, and we ate bread, and now the people have to be satisfied with manna instead of with loaves of bread and pieces of flesh.
If not (i. e. if thou dost not give us bread and flesh) we will stone you. And the whole congregation spake the word to stone them.
And Moses cried out to God, saying, ' O God, where shall I find the wherewithal to give unto this people so that they may eat?
Only a very little more and they will stone me.'
And God spake unto Moses, saying, 'I have heard the murmurings which the children of Israel have made against you.
Ye must know, therefore, O my beloved, that the supplication of the righteous man is exceedingly powerful, and it effecteth much, even as it is written.
Now as concerneth Moses, the Lawgiver of the Old Covenant, immediately that he cried out to God concerning the multitude (of the Israelites), God did according to his wish.
So also was it in the case of the Lawgiver of the New Covenant, Apa Pisentius.
Immediately he made supplication to God on behalf of the brother who was a monk, God did not cause him grief, but fulfilled his petition, even according to that which is written in the Psalm, 'The Lord shall fulfil all thy petitions,'
Hearken moreover to the account of another great and wonderful thing which took place through the holy man Apa Pisentius, when he was a monk, and before he became a bishop.
It came to pass on a certain day that he went to the well at which the brethren were in the habit of drinking, in order that he might fill his water-pot.
Now when he had come to the mouth of the well, he (found that he) had forgotten the rope and the leather bucket, and had not brought them with him.
And when he had stood up at the mouth of the well he prayed to God according to the custom of the brethren, and he said, 'God, Thou knowest well that it is impossible for me to turn back again into the monastery to fetch the rope.
But do Thou command this water to rise up to where I am so that I may be able to fill my water-pot therewith, so that I may serve Thee for the remainder of my days.
For Thou didst command Thy Apostle Peter, saying, Walk on the water
Now when he had finished his prayer, the water rose in the well until it reached the mouth of the well, and he filled his water-pot with water.
Now whilst the water was sinking downwards, a certain shepherd, who was pasturing his flock of sheep among the thorn bushes, directed his steps to the mouth of the well, and he looked in, and he saw the water going down by degrees until it reached its place at the bottom.
Unto whom shall I liken thee, O blessed Apa Pisentius?
Verily thou art like unto Moses, the Lawgiver, who made the sea to be divided, one half being on this side, and the other on that, and the children of Israel walked in the midst thereof as upon dry ground
and the water was to them a wall of water on this side and on that, on the right hand and on the left.
It was Moses who spake to the rock, and it sent forth fountains of water.
And as for thee, O holy man Apa Pisentius, thy prayer entered into the vault of heaven, and it fulfilled the Scripture, which saith, 'It was He Who spake, and they came into being; it was He Who commanded, and they were created
Thou wast a man of foresight like unto the Prophets, and a man of intellect like unto the Apostles, and thou wast a wise steward.
Therefore wast thou worthy of the Church of the Saints.
God made thee to keep alive a multitude of souls.
Thou didst preach the Gospel like Paul, and thou didst preach in wisdom the orthodox Faith. And thou didst cry out in thy discourse like a herald, thou didst shout aloud in thy wisdom like a trumpet.
Who is able to pay unto thee the honour of which thou art worthy, O just and holy man?
For thou didst know the things which were hidden before they took place.
Thy discourse which appertained to the things of this world had therein songs and parables ; thy discourse which appertained to the monkish estate (was full of) spiritual explanations.
Thy words were those of a ruler, parables and mysteries.
Thou didst never feel ashamed because of them before any man, according to that which is written, 'My words shall be testimonies concerning Thee before kings, I shall not be ashamed.'
Thou wast a father to multitudes of the poor in our time, and the father of those who were orphans in our days.
Thou didst proclaim like a herald peace unto those who were afar off, O thou God-loving father, Apa Pisentius.
And thou didst exercise (or, train) those who drew nigh unto thee in the doctrine which was sound.
Thou wast a well-skilled spiritual merchant, and therefore thou didst bestow graciously thy good gifts upon every one with great gladness and readiness.
Thou didst seek and thou didst find, O God-loving father, Apa Pisentius, thou leader of the truth.
Thou didst knock and it was opened unto thee ; thou didst petition God, and He granted thee all thy petitions.
The Governors desired eagerly (to hear) thy discourse, and all the proselytes sought eagerly after thy mysteries.
Thou didst look upon (?) the man whose name was Anatoles.
And they debated the matter together, saying, 'Who then is there that can command him (to accept)? It is not a man'
Then they took counsel together, saying, 'Let us relate the matter to the holy man Apa Colluthus, who is a great one among men; he shall reveal the matter to him (in its true light), and he will not hide the business from him'
O man, flee quickly from sin, and remember death immediately.
For it is written, 'A wise man suppresseth sin, and the face of the ascetic shall shine like the sun.'
Moreover, remember Moses, who chose to suffer with the people of God rather than to enjoy the I pleasures of sin for a time.
If thou lovest the suffering of the saints, they will make themselves to be companions of thine, and they will minister on thy behalf before God.
And He will grant thee every good thing for which thou dost petition, because thou hast taken up thy cross, and hast followed thy Lord.
Do not seek after a seat of glory among men, so that God may shelter thee from the blast of the storm of which thou knowest nothing, and may apportion thee a seat in His metropolis, Jerusalem of heaven.
Test everything.
Lay hold upon that which is good. Similarly, do not treat with contempt the image of God.
Moreover, keep diligently thy youth with all care, in order that thou mayest be able to keep diligently thine old age with all care, lest thou be put to shame, and thou come to an end in the Valley of Jehoshaphat.
The whole creation of God shall look upon thee, and they shall revile thee, saying,
 We used to think about thee every day, and believe that thou wast a sheep, but we find thee to be a wolf in this place. Get thee gone now into the pit of Amente, cast thyself down now into the heart of the earth.
O what great shame! Whilst thou didst walk in the world men gave glory to thee thinking that thou wast a man of moral excellence; the moment, however, that thou comest to the Valley of Jehoshaphat, the place of judgement, thou art found to be naked.
And every one looketh upon thy sins, and upon thy shame which is revealed to God and man.
Woe be unto thee in that hour! Whither wilt thou turn thy face?
Or, supposing that thou canst open thy mouth, what wilt thou say? Thy sins have sealed thy soul, which is black like unto sackcloth.
What wilt thou do in that hour? Thou wilt weep, but they will not accept weeping from thee. Thou wilt make supplication, but they will not accept supplication from thee because the beings into whose hands thou shalt be given are merciless.
O woe be unto thee in that hour wherein thou shalt hear that terrible voice which shall give judgement, saying, 'Let the sinners return to Amente.'
And again, 'Depart ye from Me, O ye accursed, into the everlasting fire which hath been prepared for the Devil and his angels.'
And again, 'Those who commit transgressions, and all those who work iniquity, do I hate, and I will destroy them out of the city of God'
Now therefore, O my son, make use of this world, but despise it as thou doest so, and walk therein holding it to be a thing of no account.
Follow thou the Lord in everything, and thou shalt find boldness of speech in the Valley of Jehoshaphat.
Flee not unto any being of flesh whatsoever, because when the stone striketh upon the fire breaketh out, and it burneth up very much substance.
Flee thou to the Lord at every hour, sit thou down in the shadow of Him, for he who abideth in the help of the Most High shall be under the shadow of the God of heaven, and he shall never be moved.
Remember thou the Lord and the Jerusalem of heaven; let (the memorial thereof) go up in thy heart, and thou shalt be under the blessing of heaven, and the glory of God shall support thee.
Keep thou thy body and thy heart with the greatest diligence.
Follow after peace and humility, and if these are bound together (in thee) they will make thee to see God.
For it is written, 'Seek after peace and purity, for they are bound together.
And again it is written, 'And even if I have all the faith, so that (I can) remove a mountain, without love of heart, I am benefited in nothing.
O man, wherefore art thou envious of the glory which is empty?
Or (why art thou) a lover of money, or (a lover) of magnificence, wherewith the Enemy bindeth thee in fetters, and maketh thee a stranger unto God?
What kind of apology wilt thou be able to make to the Christ when He shall say unto thee, 'Inasmuch as thou hatest thy brother, it is I Whom thou hatest?
And as for thee, thou shalt depart into the punishment which is for ever, for thou art an enemy of thy brother;
O my beloved, let us flee to the feet of the Gospel of the True Law of God, the Christ, and let us hearken unto Him, saying, 'Condemn not, that ye be not condemned.'
Forgive, that ye may be forgiven.
If thou dost not forgive, they will not forgive thee.
If thou wilt bind thy brother, prepare thyself for punishment for thy slippings aside, and for thy transgressions, and for thy fornications which thou didst commit secretly, and thy thefts, and thy obscene words, and thy evil thoughts, and thine avariciousness, (and) the evil things which thou wilt have to explain before the throne of the Christ.
The whole of God's creation will be gazing at thee, all the angels, and all the hosts of heaven will be standing there, with their swords drawn, and they will compel thee to make excuses for and to confess thy sins.
Thine apparel shall be motley, thy mouth shall be shut, thou shalt be terrorstricken to such a degree that thou shalt be unable to speak or to explain.
O wretched man, thy many fornications, which were the disease (?) of thy soul, and the lusts of the eye,
and the evil cogitations which afflict the spirit and cause grief to the soul, and the slip in the speech (or, mouth), and the tongue which speaketh words of boasting and defileth the whole body,
and the evil words of scurrility and indecency, and the gossipings which are inspired by envy and hatred, and the scoffings, and the derisive words about the image of God,
 and the voluntary revilings (or, condemnations) which will deprive thee of the good things of Paradise, and the secret passions which it would be a disgrace to mention, the evil thought towards the image of God,
and the anger, and discord, and impudence, and arrogance, and the thoughts of the heart (which sprang) from wickedness, and the want of compassion, and ambition
Hast thou never heard that 'love covereth a multitude of sins'?
And this is what your Father which is in heaven doeth for you. If ye do not forgive each other in your hearts, your Father which is in heaven will not forgive you your sins.
Behold ye know, O my beloved, that we have clothed ourselves with the good and man-loving Christ.
Let us not strip ourselves naked of Him for the sake of our evil works; for we are vowed to God in purity, and we are vowed to the life of the monk.
Let us do the works thereof which are these: fasting and praying without ceasing, and purity of the body and purity of the heart.
Since we have vowed ourselves to God in purity let us not associate ourselves with the fornications which take manifold forms,
for He saith, 'They committed fornication in very many ways.'
O my brethren, o let us not permit ourselves to be found in the works which are of the kind which will make us to fall below every (other) man.
Moreover, we have promised to become disciples of Christ;
let us therefore afflict ourselves, for sorrow bringeth low impurity.
And now that the contest is set, let us not allow ourselves to be defeated, so that we may not become slaves unto sin.
Lightgivers have been placed in the world for us, let them not be offended because of us, let us bear silently,
for very many shall be saved through our sobriety, O brethren.
Let us not enter into reckoning with each other, in order that they may not enter into reckoning with us in the hour of punishment, whether ye are virgins, or whether ye are set apart to do special work, or whether ye are anchorites.
Assuredly He shall say unto us, Bring (it hither), this belongeth to Me, and the increase thereof.' And He shall chide us, and say unto us, ' Where is the apparel of the bridal chamber?
'If thou dost not make peace with thy brother in this world,
I will not be with thee in the Day of the Great Judgement.
(If) thou despisest the poor man, it is I Whom thou despisest therewith.
(If) thou rejectest the man of misery, thou art the fellow (or, companion) of the man who rejected Me in My humility upon the Cross.
Did I ever demand from thee anything during My absence from My home in the world?
Did I not bestow upon thee My Body and My Blood, the Good of life?
Did I not taste the death for thy sake until I redeemed thee?
Did I not make thee acquainted with the mystery of heaven, and make thee My brother and companion?
Did I not give unto thee the power to trample under thy feet vipers and scorpions, and all the might of the Enemy?
Did I not give unto thee manifold medicines of life wherewith thou mightest heal thyself?
My powers, and My signs, and My miracles, which I bore in the world as the [ armour of soldierhood I gave unto thee that thou mightest gird thyself about therewith, and mightest cast down head-long Goliath, that is to say the Devil.
Now therefore, O my son, these things and those which are far more severe shall we hear if we continue to be careless, and are not obedient (to the command) to forgive one another.
Let us be sober.
We know the virtues of God which shall help us in the day of death, and which shall act as a guide for us in the midst of the cruel and terrifying war, and which shall raise up (our) soul(s) from the dead.
Now first of all there have been given unto us faith and the knowledge whereby we may expel unbelief from within us.
Next, there have been given unto us wisdom and understanding which enable us to understand the thoughts of the Devil, and to flee from him, and to hate him.
(And) there are preached unto us fasting, and prayer, and continence, which shall give peace and tranquillity in the body (which is vexed) by passion.
There have been given unto us purity and abstinence through which God shall dwell in us.
And there have been given unto us patient endurance and long-suffering, and if we keep carefully all these (virtues) we shall inherit the glory of God.
There have been given unto us love and peace, these mighty warriors in the battle, for the Enemy is unable to draw nigh unto the place wherein these are.
We have been commanded concerning the joy wherein there is no grief if we fight.
And we have also been instructed in generosity and in Christlikeness.
There have been given unto us holy prayer and long-suffering, which are wont to fill the soul with light.
There have been given unto us innocency of heart and simplicity, which are wont to blot out wickedness.
Directions have been written down for us in respect of judging no man, and we must overcome the falsehood of this evil blemish which is in man
for if we do not judge they will not judge us in the Day of Judgement.
For the pleasure which attendeth drinking in excess maketh a man of understanding- to become a fool, and it turneth the conscience into a shameless thing, and it setteth loose the bridle of the tongue.
The greatest joy in all the world is to sorrow in the Holy Spirit; let us not stray in pleasure.
For the priest spake, and the prophet gave a warning concerning wine,
'Wine is insolent, drunkenness is a disgrace; whosoever shall devote himself to these shall not be innocent of sin'
Wine is good if we drink it in moderation ; if thou givest thine eye to the wine-bottles and to the drinking-pots, thou shalt go naked, even like a corn-stalk (?).
Therefore let all those who have prepared themselves to be disciples of Jesus keep themselves away from wine and from drunkenness.
For our fathers knew very well the danger which would arise because of wine, and they abstained from it, for they were wont to drink it in very small quantities when suffering from sickness.
Now if only a very little wine was allowed to be given to the mighty workman Timothy, whose body was in a very infirm condition, then what shall I say in respect of the man who is bubbling over with wickedness, and is in the prime of early manhood, and who hath in him impure desires and passion in abundance?
I am afraid to say it: Let no man drink wine at all, so that he may not hate his own salvation (and) murmur against me.
For these words will be hard unto many at (this) time.
Nevertheless, my beloved, it is good to keep oneself (from wine), and soberness (?) is beneficial ; for he who keepeth himself sober (?) shall sail in safety his ship into the harbour of the salvation, which is good and holy, and he shall drink of the good things of heaven.
And again, a greater thing than all these hath been given into thine hand, namely, the humility which keepeth watch over all the virtues ; humility was this great and holy power wherein God arrayed Himself when He came into the world.
It is the wall (round about) the virtues, the treasure-house of actions (or, deeds), the armour which delivereth, the healer of every grief.
And when the apparel of byssus had been made, and the vessels of gold for the tabernacle, and all the things for adornment, they put on apparel of sackcloth.
(Humility) is one of the least of things in the sight of men, but it is chosen and most honourable before God.
If we acquire it for ourselves we shall (be able to) tread upon all the power of the Enemy.
For He said, 'On whom shall I look except upon him that is humble and long-suffering?'
Let us not relax our attention in the time of hunger, for boasting increaseth in a man as well as prudence.
When gluttony increaseth, fornication reigneth through the drinking of the body, (and) pride hath rule, and the novices cease to listen to the elders, and the elders cease to trouble in any way about the novices, and each one walketh according to the desire of his own heart.
This is the time wherein we must cry out with the prophet, 'Woe unto me, O my soul, for he who striketh terror destroyeth upon the earth.
And he who is upright among men existeth not according to the Christ, that is to say he doth not exist at all, and each one afflicteth his neighbour.'
Strive ye, O my beloved, for the time hath drawn nigh, and the days have diminished. The father no longer giveth instruction to his son, and the son hearkeneth not to his father.
The good Virgins have come to an end. The holy fathers are asleep in every place, the mothers are destroyed like the widows, we have become like unto orphans.
Let us fight for ourselves, inasmuch as repentance is sufficient for us.
Let us put on ourselves sorrow, and make ourselves new (creatures) in humility.
Let us become lovers of men, and make ourselves companions of Christ, the Lover of mankind.
Since we are vowed unto God, (we must lead) the life of the monk in love.
Virginity doth not (mean) virginity of the body only, but the keeping of oneself from every sin.
For in the Gospel certain virgins were rejected because of their careless slothfulness, whilst those who watched bravely went into the chamber of the bridegroom.
May it happen then that every one (here) may enter into that place for ever!
And as concerning the love of money by means of which fighting is carried on against us.
If thou wishest to gain for thyself these things (or, possessions) which are transient, and can be destroyed by fire, by great avariciousness, or by trafficking, or by violence, or by evil design, or by excessive manual labour, thou art not free to serve God, at least certainly not in every way.
If thou hast the eager desire to collect for thyself gold or bronze, remember that which He spake in the Gospel, saying, 'Thou man of no understanding, they shall carry away thy soul this very night; (and) the things which thou hast prepared unto whom shall they belong?
Strive eagerly then, O my beloved, and fight against (this) passion.
Thou shalt say, 'I will do what Abraham did, I will act uprightly in respect of God, the Most High, Who created the heavens and the earth—saying. If I have taken anything of the things which belong unto thee, from a thread even unto a shoe-latchet'
The stranger who is humble is a great good, and the Lord loveth the proselyte. Concerning, moreover, the slothfulness by means of which fighting is carried on against us, (and) concerning the right hand of need,
remember that it is written, 'Thy houses for gathering in are accursed, and the things which are in them.'
And again concerning the gold and the bronze James spake, saying, 'Their rust shall bear witness against them, and the rust shall devour your flesh like fire.'
And, 'He chose a man, a righteous man who had no idol, he saw their affliction'
Again, purify thyself from the curse before the Lord calleth thee, for thou hast set thy hope upon God, because it is written 'Let your hearts be purified, (and) perfect towards God.'
I enquire of thee, O my beloved in the Lord,
for if thou hast made God to be a helper (unto thee), and if thou art unto Him one beloved, and if thou hast set thy heart to walk in the commandments of God,
then will God Himself bless thee so greatly that thy fountain shall become a river unto thee, and thy river shall become unto thee a sea.
For thou art the chariot, and continence shall be the charioteer. The lamp of God is kindled above thee, and thou shalt give forth the light which belongeth unto the Spirit.
Thou shalt control thy words in (giving) judgement.
God granteth unto thee graciously the skill of the saints in contending, so that thou mayest not fall headlong before the image (or, phantom) in thy city.
Thou settest thy foot upon the neck of the prince of darkness.
And besides these things, I command thee not to relax thy hold upon thy heart, for it is the joy of devils to make a man to relax his hold upon his heart, and to bring him into the net before he is aware of it.
Therefore be not thou careless in receiving the teaching of the fear of the Lord.
Thou shalt go forward (or, grow) like the new plants,
and thou shalt please God like a new (i. e. young) bull which driveth away the sheep with (his) horns.
Moreover, be thou a valiant man, both in deed and in word.
Do not turn thy face away as do the hypocrites, lest thou join them and become converted unto them.
Do not destroy (or, waste) the first day (of the week) in thy field, for thou must know what that must give to God day by day.
Seat thyself by thyself, like a prudent governor, and try (thyself) judicially according to thy reason; and whether thou art away by qf thyself on a journey, or whether thou art among a crowd,
thou shall pass judgement on thyself daily.
For it is very much better for thee to be one among a crowd of a thousand people and to possess a very little humility, than to be a man living in the cave of a hyena in pride.
It may be remembered in respect of Lot, that he lived in the midst of Sodom, and still was a believer and a good man.
But we also hear in respect of Cain, with whom upon the earth there were only three other people, that he became a sinner.
Now therefore, behold, the contest is prepared for thee. Examine thou carefully those who come upon thee daily, for we must hide ourselves even as those who wage war against us hide themselves.
For the devils are not wont to come against thee on the right hand only, but they appear also on the left hand to every man.
For in very truth, in my own case, they fought against me on the right-hand side, and they brought unto me the Devil, being bound in the form of a wild ass, but the Lord helped me.
Now, therefore, O my son, array thyself in humility, and make the Christ to be unto thee a counsellor, and His Good Father (also);
make thyself a companion and a divine man, in whose heart is the Law of God.
Make thyself to be like unto the poor man who carried His Cross, who became a companion of weeping.
Make thyself to become poor, (put) a napkin on thy head, and let thy place of abode be unto thee a tomb, until God shall raise thee up and give unto thee the crown of triumph.
If it happeneth on a time that thou art utterly cast down about a brother, who hath caused thee suffering by (his) words ;
or if thy heart hath been wounded by a brother, and thou sayest, 'he is not worth this ';
Remember how that thou thyself hast benefited on several occasions.
Dost thou not hear the Christ saying, 'Forgive thy brother seventy times seven'?
Dost thou thyself not weep often when thou makest supplication, saying, 'Forgive me I the multitude of my sins '?
And straightway thou shalt rise up, and thou shalt be [feeling] the consolation of repentance,
thou shalt flee to the feet of thy brother,
thy heart shall be as water,
thy face shall be joyful, thy mouth shall be filled with gladness,
peace shall be enveloping thee, and thou shalt make supplication to thy brother,
Thy weeping shall be abundant, but great joy shall be unto thee through (thy) tears.
And peace shall boast itself in your midst, and the Spirit of God Himself shall rejoice and shall cry out, saying, 'Blessed are the peacemakers, for it is they who shall be called the sons of God.'
When the Enemy heareth the sound of the voice (of thy weeping) he becometh ashamed.
(Take care) that God is glorified, so that a great blessing may be unto thee.
Now therefore, O my brother, let us fight boldly. Thou knowest that contention existeth in every place.
The churches are filled with men who love fighting and with men of wrath.
The Congregations and the bodies of monks love to arrogate to themselves greatness, pride hath made itself to be king (or, to rule).
No man sheweth bravery on behalf of his neighbour, but every man inflicteth persecution on his neighbour.
We have fallen into the midst of sufferings.
There is neither prophet nor Gnostic.
No man chideth another in respect of any matter, because hardness of heart hath increased.
He who hath understanding shall speak out, for the time is evil.
Every man maketh himself to be his own king, and they devote their minds to the contemplation of the things which are unseemly.
Through the diligence and the care of our God-loving brother, Xael, the son of the blessed Stephanos, the rush of lions on the man of the plains, belonging to the heart of the city, Esna.
He composed this book through his labor.
He presented it to the monastery of the Holy Macarius of the mountain of the city, Tbow, for the salvation of his soul in order for them to read in it the name of the Holy John, and the Holy Apa Pahmon so that the Holy Macarius, the soldier and courageous martyr and the Holy John the Baptist, the forerunner of Christ and the Holy Apa Pahmon, the Archimandrite will intercede to Christ for him.
and that he blesses him in this world and that he preserves him from every snare of the Devil and wicked men and he assists him in every good thing after the circumstance of this life so he will be worthy of the forgiveness of his sins and receive the inheritance of all the saints, as it shall come to pass. Amen.
Remember, for my part, Theopistis, of the deacon, the son of Severus, the archpriest of the Holy Macarius of the City Esna.
 I wrote this work by my hand. Pray for me so that God forgives the multitude of my sins because they cry out exceedingly.
[HERE BEGINNETH] THE MARTYRDOM OF SAINT BIKTÔR (VICTOR), THE GENERAL AND MARTYR, THE MAN GLORIOUS IN CHRIST, THE WEARER OF THE CROWN IN VERY TRUTH, WHO COMPLETED HIS GLORIOUS STRIFE ON THE SEVEN AND TWENTIETH DAY OF THE MONTH PHARMOUTE.
IN THE PEACE OF GOD. MAY HIS HOLY BLESSING COME UPON US, AND MAY WE ALL BE SAVED TOGETHER. AMEN.
And it came to pass in the kingdom (i. e. reign) of the Emperor Diocletian in the third year of his reign, in the first month, that the Devil led his heart astray from God, and made him to do the things that were not seemly.
And Diocletian worshipped idols, and thrust the God of heaven behind his back, for the sake of [creatures made of] wood and stones, and for the sake of the vain things that were fashioned by the hands of men.
Hearken [ye] now to [the account of] the valour of the young man [called] Victor.
And the Emperor Diocletian took counsel and decided to do the things that were unseemly before God, Jesus the Christ; and this is what he did.
He made seventy images of gold, and gave unto them the name of gods which they certainly were not.
To thirty-five of these he gave names of gods, and to thirty-five the names of goddesses;
now the number of his other gods and goddesses amounted to one hundred and forty.
And it came to pass at dawn, on the first day of the month Parmoute, that the Emperor Diocletian, and all his army, and the eparchs, and the generals went into the temple.
And the Emperor took his seat upon the throne, and he caused the herald to make a proclamation, saying,
O [all] ye Roman people, come ye and offer up sacrifice.'
And the Emperor made an altar of silver and a vessel wherein to burn incense of gold ;
and he made a great pedestal of gold,
and he placed it before the altar so that the [statue of] Apollo might be set upon it.
And the Emperor commanded them to bring frankincense, and the finest flour of wheat, and the purest oil, and rare old wine, and to pour them out upon the altar whereon was blazing fire.
And afterwards they lighted two hundred candles on golden candlesticks, and four hundred candles on silver candlesticks, and two hundred white horses drew his gods into the temple.
'And when they had brought his gods into the temple the Emperor Diocletian stood up on his throne,
and he lifted his crown off his head, and set it upon the head of [the statue of] Apollo, and he bowed down and worshipped it three times, saying,
Thou art the god who livest, O Apollo, the greatest of the gods, who dost give unto us victory in war.
And after the Emperor had worshipped Apollo, his three fellow [Caesars], Romanus, Basileides, and Euaios, came and worshipped Apollo also.
Now these | held equal rank and power with the Fol. 2 « Emperor, and he loved them exceedingly.
And it came to pass that when the turn of the Protector had come to offer up sacrifice, now his name was Basileides
And it came to pass that when all the people had offered up sacrifice it came to the turn of his son to offer up sacrifice.
Now he was a young man of nineteen years of age, and he worshipped God, and held His commandments in fear.
He was a virgin in body, he ate once only each week, he prayed all night long,
and from the day wherein he had heard the Christians crying out to him in the church his heart had departed into heaven.
He hated the world. He did not drink wine, neither did he eat food cooked with fire.
He did not decorate his person, and he did not adorn himself with rich apparel and fine raiment.
He did not mount the horse which was used in a chariot (i. e. a war-horse).
He neither ate food with his father nor did he enter into converse with him in the presence of any one who was greater than himself.
He never gave utterance to an obscene (or, scurrilous) word,
and never, under any circumstances, did he swear an oath by anything or by anybody.
And whenever he heard concerning any one who was in distress, if that person w^ere a Christian, ^ he used to minister unto him,
And his father wearied him exceedingly, saying, 'I shall take the daughter of Basileides the general for thee to wife,'
for his father and Basileides had made an agreement in respect of her for two hundred centenarii of gold, besides gifts, and four hundred centenarii of silver,
and ten menservants, and ten hundred maidservants wearing golden bracelets, and four hundred horses, and ten hundred mules, and ten hundred camels, and ten hundred farms which were under tillage,
and ten hundred ships which sailed the sea, and ten houses (palaces ?) to [each] one of which were attached ten farms under tillage,
besides the things which his father was to give to him, and a very large number of men who were to do the work on [his] land.
And the blessed Apa Victor would not be persuaded by his father and Basileides, and he said unto them,
' All these things shall perish ' ;
and he kept himself for the kingdom that is in the heavens.
And the Lord Jesus was wont to appear to him, face to face, and He loved him because of his purity.
And the noble Victor made for himself a small chamber in his house, I and there he would retire to be free from the company of his parents.
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
HERE BEGINNETH THE LIFE OF THE BLESSED JOHN, THE PERFECT MONK, WHOSE PARENTS MADE FOR HIM A GOSPEL OF GOLD
AND WHO ENDED HIS LIFE, WITH THE MOST EXCELLENT PATIENT ENDURANCE, ON THE FOURTH DAY OF THE MONTH MEKHIR, IN THE PEACE OF GOD. PRAY FOR US ALL! AMEN.
This life which I will now describe unto you is that of a man of God, who lived in our time, and it must be regarded with wonder.
And they had three children.
Now two of these had been appointed to high positions in the Palace of the Emperors,
and the youngest had been sent to receive instruction in the works of God.
And after these things he learned the teachings of the wise men, and associated with them.
Moreover he learned the works of God, and attached himself to the church, making enquiries concerning God by day and by night.
And this monk spake unto John inside his house with the words of God,
and John marvelled exceedingly when he saw the monkish brother, and his garb, and perceived his pleasant manner of speech, and his internal thought about God, which was like fire.
The monkish brother said unto him, 'I live in the Monastery of the Sleepless Ones.'
And if God pleaseth I wish to go to Jerusalem so that I may pray there in the Holy Place, and, by the will of God, I will return again to my place.
And the monk informed him concerning everything about which John enquired of him.
And when John had heard these words he laid hold upon the hand of the monkish brother, and took him to a place which was quiet and secret,
and he made him to swear great oaths, saying unto him, 'My beloved brother, when thou hast gone to Jerusalem, and hast returned in peace, thou shalt not hide thyself from me,
neither shalt thou depart to thy monastery and forsake me, and I will not hide anything from thee during the whole course of my life. My parents, however, love me very much more than they love my brethren,
for they have placed me in the hands of instructors,
and my father saith, 'I will give thee high offices.'
Moreover, according to what is in his heart, he wisheth to give me seven offices, each of which is more exalted than his own.
After these things he wisheth to make me a bridegroom.
And, moreover, when I go into the church I hear them proclaiming and saying, 'Everything in this world is contemptible,' and 'Let him that despiseth this world follow the Christ with a right heart,' and even so he shall hardly be saved.
And after these things the blessed John took counsel with himself, saying, 'First of all let me go to my parents, so that i may make them prepare for me a Gospel wherein I may read, for I do not know the commandments of Christ,
and I would find Him in the place whither I am going.'
And he came to the house of his parents,
and he told them the reason [for his desire], and he spake unto them thus: 'Behold, O my parents, I am put to shame among my fellow scholars, for of all those who are at school with me each one hath his own Gospel of gold, which their parents have prepared for them to read in.
As for me I am like a beggar in their midst, and like one who hath neither father nor mother.'
And when his mother heard [these words] she rejoiced exceedingly, for it was her wish that he should be well instructed.
And when she had thought over these things she spake unto her husband, saying, 'My lord brother, make a Gospel of gold for our son John.
Do not have it beautifully written only, but decorate it also beautifully with really precious stones of great value.'
And straightway his father commanded,
and one brought to him five hundred holokottinoi (oboli) and precious stones of great beauty, and he gave them to a cunning goldsmith,
and he made for him very beautiful decorations for the Gospel which he had caused to be written.
And John's father took it and gave it to his son,
and John took it, and rejoiced over it,
and he studied it with great diligence.
And he waited for that brother who was a monk to come in order to depart with him;
And when John saw the brother who was a monk he rejoiced exceedingly, and was glad, and he saluted him, and he was in a state of great joy.
And he said unto him, 'My lord father, I know the wishes of my parents, and their love towards me,
and especially the wish and love of my mother. If she were to hear of such a thing as this in connection with me she would weep, and suffer greatly because of me.
I therefore beseech thee to let us arrange that we go away secretly,
and not to let any one know of our departure.'
And the monk said unto him, 'Whatsoever pleaseth thee that will I do with thee,
And John and the monk rose up,
and they departed secretly.
And they arrived at the sea, and they searched for a boat wherein to embark.
Then John said unto him, 'I will give them to thee';
and when John had said this he came to the place where was the brother who was a monk,
and he said unto him, 'My father, the ship's fare is large, and it is meet for thee that we should depart quickly, lest some people meet us, and they recognize us, and they seize us, and we be put to shame. Therefore, let us flee secretly.'
Then John went into his house to his mother,
and he said unto her, 'I make entreaty unto thee, O my beloved mother. I know well that thou fulfillest all my wishes,
but there is one thing that I lack, [and which if granted] would cause us both to be praised.'
And she said unto him, 'Whatsoever thou wishest ask at my hand, my son, and I will fulfill thy desire for thee.'
And John said unto his mother, 'Thou knowest that all the youths who are with me at school have provided me with meals, and that not once, nor twice, and that I have eaten often of their provisions.
Now there is nothing at all which I can do for them in return for what they have given unto me,
and I am in truth ashamed to enter the school again because of this matter.'
His mother saith unto him, 'Whatsoever thou wishest I will do for thee.
When thy father cometh into the house at the hour of noon I will make him to give it (i.e., money) to thee, so that thou and thy companions mayest do what thou wishest therewith.'
And his father answered and said, 'I will give unto him everything that he wisheth for,
and appointed a servant to attend him.
And when John had taken the money he went to the place wherein was the monk, both he and the servant who accompanied him, and he said unto the monk, 'My lord brother, this servant whom thou seest belongeth to me.
I beseech thee to do me an act of grace, and let him tarry with thee, whilst I go to the place where some neighbours of mine are to enquire concerning a certain person who was coming to me at this hour.'
Then the old man, the monk, understood that he was talking to him concerning the captain of the ship,
and that he wished to go away by himself by reason of the servant who accompanied him.
And John took the hundred oboli, and came to the place of the captain of the ship,
I beseech thee, O my lord brother, to make ready to sail, and let us depart quickly, I and my brother.'
And when the captain heard this, [and knew] that he wished to depart secretly, he said unto him, 'I have already finished making my ship ready to sail, and I have already told you that the passage money by my ship is high.
However, if thou wilt remain in this place until I have loaded up my vessel, I will embark thee.'
And John said, 'I have already told thee that I will give thee the passage money, according to what thou didst say.'
And straightway he brought out the hundred oboli in his hand, rejoicing greatly,
and he gave them to him, saying, 'Whatsoever thou informest me [is needed] more than these I will give unto thee.
And when the captain of the ship heard these words he took the hundred oboli in his hand, and rejoiced exceedingly,
and he said unto John, 'Go and bring thy companion, and come [back];
if it be the will of God I will take most excellent care of you.'
And John returned,
and informed the brother who was a monk about everything that had happened unto him.
And after two days John said unto the monk, 'Rise up, and let us depart by sea, because this is the day whereon I ought to make ready the meal for my fellow learners,
and I ought to seek for some small fish for them.'
And they came to the sea-shore by the will of God,
and a favorable wind arose,
and the captain embarked on the ship, and stood on the side of it,
and he stooped down and beckoned to John and the monk, saying, 'Arise come ye and embark.'
Now they were troubled, for they wished to send away the servant from them, and to leave him behind,
but they could not find any satisfactory means for doing so.
And John said unto the servant who was accompanying him, 'Rise up and go to the palace, to the scholars, and see if they have all assembled there, and then come back quickly and let me know;
behold, I will wait for thee here';
and the servant departed.
And they themselves went up into the ship, which set sail at once,
and they arrived at the monastery by the will of God.
And the servant returned to the sea-shore and did not find them,
and he was disturbed exceedingly in his mind, saying, 'Shall I take to flight and not tell my master?'
Then he said, 'I am afraid that they will make search for me and that they will find me, and inflict many evils upon me;
And it came to pass that when his mother heard these things she rent her garments,
and she scattered dust upon her head,
and she wept with a great weeping, saying, 'Woe is me, O my beloved son John!
What hath become of thee, O my sweet son? Woe is me, O my son! For thy face is . . . . . . . . . O John, my beloved son!
Woe is me!
Who hath carried away the light of my body?
I know not.
Woe is me!
Who hath carried away my beloved son, the darling of my soul?
O John, my beloved son!
O light of mine eyes!
Why did I send thee forth after wisdom in this manner [to meet] the fate which hath come upon thee?
Woe be unto me, o my son, who was sweet to everyone!
Woe be unto me, my son, my sweet one, thou face full of joy!
Woe unto me, thou who resemblest the angels!
Woe unto me! What shall I do from this day henceforth?'
And thus also did his father weep, with groanings, and sighings, and sorrow of heart, and he cried out, saying, What hath happened unto thee, O my beloved son?
I know not what hath happened unto thee suddenly.'
And whilst the seven days of weeping were being fulfilled the whole city mourned with them.
Then his father rose up and went into the palace, and informed the king of everything which had happened,
and he entreated him to send out an order to every part of his kingdom, so that the people might seek for his son, and, peradventure, might find him.
And [although] his parents have worn themselves out in going round about without finding him they ascribed glory to God.
And John came to the monastery, he and the monk also who accompanied him,
and he carried with him the Gospel of gold which his parents had made for him,
and he (i.e., the monk) informed the head of the monastery of everything which had happened to the young man John, and about his great belief in God.
And the Archimandrite said unto the young man, 'My son, behold, I see that thou art young in years, but exceedingly well-doing in thy works.
Moreover, my son, every one who wisheth to withdraw himself from this world, if he be of thine age, waiteth patiently for forty days, and after that period the hair of his head is shaved off, and then he assumeth the garb of the monk.'
And John said unto him, 'I adjure thee, O my holy father, by the Holy and Consubstantial Trinity, and by the prayers of the monastery, that thou shave my head this day, and especially, as God knoweth, my heart burneth with desire for the life of the monk, and for the garb of the angels.'
And the Archimandrite was persuaded, and straightway he prayed over him, and he placed upon him the angelic garb.
And the heart of John rejoiced within him exceedingly, and he prayed to God by day and by night with such exceedingly long prayers that his praying, and his daily contest, and his asceticism were far in excess of a very great many of those who were his neighbours.
and besides this he engaged in many contests of self-abnegation, and practised many habits of self-repression.
And the Archimandrite saw him, and marvelled exceedingly.
And the Archimandrite said unto him, 'My son, thou art a very young man, but behold, I see thee practising very many mighty works of abstinence; thou wilt thyself destroy thine own body, and wilt not be able to stand up, neither to pray, nor to fast.
For overmuch ascetic labour exhausteth a man greatly, and maketh him weak.'
But John did not cease to practise the labours which he had begun to perform.
I rose up and I followed him.
I walked through the Paradise, and I looked round about, and I saw the tree in the middle of Paradise;
now it had no fruit upon it, and thorns grew all over it, and the trunk went down into the ground a very long way.
And I answered and said to the Cherubim, 'Make me to understand the matter of this tree which hath no fruit on it,
and which is grown over with thorns.'
And the Cherubim said unto me, 'This is the tree [of the fruit] of which Adam ate and became naked.'
And I said unto him, 'There is no fruit on it;
where did he find the fruit which he ate?'
And he said unto me, 'A kind of fruit did grow on it, and it was not without fruit [at that time].'
And I said unto him, 'Of what kind was its fruit?'
He said unto me, 'It was a kind of apple.'
And I said unto the Cherubim, 'Shall it remain wholly without fruit, or not?'
And he said unto me, 'This is the order which God laid upon it from the beginning.'
Now whilst I was marvelling at these things I saw Adam.
He was coming along at a distance, and he was like unto a man who was weeping.
He was spreading out his garment, and he was carrying away in his garment [the leaves] which were under the tree, and pouring them out on the ground, and burying them.
Then the Cherubim said unto me, 'Four and twenty angels are appointed to Paradise daily,
and twelve go in there daily to worship God.
Now at the moment when the Devil went into Paradise, and seduced Adam, there was no angel at all in Paradise,
but an agreement took place [that they should remain outside it] until Adam had eaten of the tree.'
And I said to him, 'If they agreed to this, with the consent of God, then no sin rests upon Adam.' And the Cherubim said unto me, 'By no means. If Adam had been patient for a short time, God would have said to him, 'Eat thou of the tree.'
God removed the righteousness wherewith he was arrayed, and He cast him forth from Paradise, in order that the things which He spake might be fulfilled [when] He should send His Son into the world.'
And I said unto him, 'My Lord, of what kind was this righteousness wherein Adam was arrayed, and which he received from His hand?'
And he said unto me, 'On the day wherein God created Adam, he was twelve cubits in height,
and six cubits in width,
and, again, I have heard that God brought a deep sleep upon Adam, and that when he was unconscious, He took one of the ribs from his side,
and made it into a woman, and that He filled up the place where the rib was in his side with flesh.
The Almighty did not then create two bodies,
there being [only] one body.'
And he answered and he said unto me, 'Hearken, and I will explain unto you everything.
At the time when God created Adam, He created Eve also with him, in one body,
for at the time when the Master was working at Adam, the thought concerning Eve was with Him.
For this reason two bodies came from one body,
but He did not separate them from each other immediately.
At the time when He brought slumber upon him, and he fell asleep,
and he slept heavily, He brought Eve forth from him, and she became his wife. She was, of a surety, hidden in the rib of the left side [of Adam] from the day wherein God created him.
Consider then, with great attention the sign which is in the sons of Adam.'
And I said unto him, 'O my Lord,
what is the sign which is in the sons of Adam?'
'And the Cherubim said unto me, 'At the moment when the ice (or, cold) was about to come upon the earth, the first things which went cold in the body of the man were his finger nails.
Because at the time when God deprived Adam of the righteousness wherein he was arrayed,
And any man who was attacked by a sickness [or, disease], no matter of what kind, used to go into the temple, and look upon the wall, until he found there written the remedy which was suitable for his sickness;
then he would take that remedy, and would go into his house, ascribing glory to God.
And it came to pass that, after Solomon the king was dead, Hezekiah plastered over the walls of the temple with lime, and the prescriptions for the relief of sickness could no longer be found.
Now when Hezekiah the king had fallen sick, and was sick unto death, he could not find the prescription whereby to heal his sickness,
because it was he himself who had plastered over the walls of the temple with lime.
And when the prescriptions which had been written upon them could not be found again, he went into the house of the Lord,
and lay down there, and he looked upon the wall, and he wept,
saying, 'My Lord, let not that which I have done in the matter of plastering over with lime the walls, whereon were inscribed the prescriptions for healing, be held to be a sin [by Thee], for I said, Let men make supplication to God with hope, and they shall find healing.
Never shall I find a prescription for healing whereby I may be made whole.'
And the Lord heard [him], and had compassion upon him, and sent unto him Isaiah the Prophet, and he spake unto him, saying, 'Take the fruit(?) of the wild fig-tree, and plaster it over thy body, and thou shalt find relief.'
And again I said unto the Cherubim,
My Lord, I would that thou didst make me to understand the matter of the Cherubim, whose voices cry so loudly
in heaven that mankind tremble upon earth (at the sounds thereof).'
And the Cherubim said unto me, Dost thou see these great winds which are shut up inside their storehouses, over which the angels are set?
When the trumpet soundeth inside the covering (or, veil), the gentle winds come forth, and they breathe upon the wings of the angel who is over the fountain of the dew; then the angel moveth his wings, and the dew cometh upon the earth, and the seed (or, grain) groweth in the earth,
and the trees, and the crops, and the fruit.
If the trumpet doth not sound, a harsh, strong noise cometh forth from heaven, and thereupon the waters of rain come upon the earth in great quantities, which make the fruits grow, and rain-storms,
and thunders of which men are afraid.
For it is the sound of the rustling of the wings of the Seraphim which governs the waters of rain,
until they come down into the firmament; and they fall on the earth gently,
for if they were to descend upon the earth in their (full) violence they would lay waste the earth just as did the waters of Noah and the lightnings which came with them.
(This would happen) if the Seraphim did not come down to govern the waters of the rain, for all the waters are in the sky and the heavens.
Behold, I have made clear to you all mysteries.'
And I answered and said unto the Cherubim, 'My Lord, I would that thou didst make me to know what it is which supporteth the sky
and maketh it to be suspendeth thus.'
And he said unto me, 'It is suspended by faith, and by the ordinance of God.'
And I said unto him, 'What is it that supporteth the earth?'
And he said unto me, 'It is four pillars which support the earth, and they are sealed with seven seals.'
And I said unto him, 'My Lord, be not wroth with me
when I ask thee this matter also;
He said unto me, 'Hearken, I will shew thee.
God appointed twelve Cherubim to stand outside the curtain (or, inner veil) and they were not to toil in any way, but were to sing twelve hymns daily.
When the first Cherubim had finished (singing) his hymn, the first hour came to an end.
When the second Cherubim had finished (singing) his hymn, the second hour came to an end, and so on until the twelfth Cherubim.
When the twelfth (Cherubim had finished singing his hymn), the twelve hours were ended.'
I said to him, 'As concerning the twelve hours of the night: are there Seraphim appointed over them, or not?'
And he said unto me, 'Assuredly not, but when the beasts, and the birds, and the reptiles
pray, the first hour is ended.
When the second hour is ended, the beasts pray (again), and so on until the twelfth hour of the night;
it is the animals of God which set limits to them.'
And I said unto the Cherubim, 'Doth the sun know when the twelve hours have come to an end,
so that he may depart to the place where he setteth or riseth?'
And he said unto me, 'When the angels who blow the trumpets have finished, Michael knoweth that the twelfth hymn is finished, and he speaketh to the Angel of the Sun, who goeth and bringeth an end to his course.'
And I answered and said unto the Cherubim, 'My Lord, is it God Who ordaineth the life of a man from the time when he was in his mother's womb, or not?'
And he said unto me, 'Know thou that (one) man is wont to perform very many superfluous works, (and another) very many acts of goodness, from the time when he is born to the end of his life.
And I said unto the Cherubim, 'Man hath been born to suffering,
according to what Job said, 'My mother brought me forth for suffering.'
And he said unto me, 'God is a compassionate Being,
and He doth not forsake man utterly,
but He sheweth mercy upon him, for he is His own form, and His own image,
and the work of His own hands.
And now, O John, He will not forsake him that doeth the will of God, and he who doeth good things shall receive them doubled many times over in the House of God.'
And I said unto the Cherubim, 'My Lord, at the moment when God is about to create man, doth He give him the name 'righteous' or 'sinner,' or not?'
And he said unto me, 'Hearken, and I will shew thee.
At the moment when God is about to create a man, before He placeth him
in the womb of his mother, He calleth all the angels, and they come and stand round about.
If the Father blesseth the soul, the angels make answer 'Amen.'
If there come from His mouth the words 'This soul shall give Me rest,' the angels make answer, 'Amen.'
If the Father saith, 'This soul shall commit iniquity,'
the angels make answer, 'Amen.'
Whatsoever cometh forth from the mouth of the Father, that cometh to pass.'
And I said unto him, 'Is the matter of which man is fashioned more excellent than that of the beasts?'
He said unto me, 'Now when men die, each one of them is taken
to the place of which he is worthy,
but so far as beasts are concerned, whether they die,
And I said unto him, 'Are there souls in them?'
He said unto me, 'Every created thing hath a soul in it.'
Now, therefore, the soul of every created thing is its blood.'
And I said unto him, 'Will they then be punished,
or will rest be given unto them?'
He said unto me, 'Let it not be that rest be not given unto them, and let them suffer not;
but man is a being who can suffer, and can enjoy rest.' And it came to pass that when I had heard all these things, I marvelled at the works which God performeth in connexion with man.
And I said unto him, 'Be not wroth with me if I ask this matter.
I would that thou didst inform me concerning the stars which we see in the firmament, and tell me why it is that we cease to see them when the sun hath risen.
I would that thou didst inform me where it is they go until it is time for them to perform their service.' And he said unto me, 'The stars are of different orders.
There are some stars which remain in the heavens until noon,
but they cannot be seen because of the light of the sun.
There are seven stars which come in the north of the world, and they remain there in the heavens always.
And there are seven stars in the heavens which are called 'the gods'; those which are there are not permitted
to emerge from their place of storehouse,
except when death cometh upon the earth.'
And I said unto him, 'Why is it that one star differeth from another?
And why is it that a star is wont to transfer itself from the place which it had originally (to another)?'
And the Cherubim said unto me, 'Hearken, and I will make known unto you everything.
There are very many orders of stars which move from the place wherein they were placed originally,
but the decree of God which directeth them abideth forever.
Behold now, I have made manifest unto thee all things, O beloved one of God. Arise, get thee down into the world, and tell therein everything which thou hast seen.'
Then straightway he brought me down on the Mount of Olives, where I found the Apostles gathered together. And I told them of the things which I had seen, and when we had saluted (or, kissed) each other, each departed to his country, ascribing glory to God.
And Apa Victor looked closely at the man, and he knew of a certainty that he was a phantom, and he; said unto him
Get thee gone from me. It is through thee that the whole world is in a state of disruption, and it is through thee that the worship of idols flourisheth.'
And the blessed man Apa Victor turned his face towards the east, and said
Shew Thy compassion upon me, O Thou only Son of Thy Father, my Lord Jesus the Christ, and deliver out of all my tribulations
And when the Devil heard the Name of Jesus, straightway he made himself visible.
And Apa Victor continued to live in the Camp, and Jesus was with him in everything which he did.
And the noble man Victor meditated within himself and said, 'What kind of work can I do whereby I may live?'
Now he had learned the trade of an artisan, and whilst he was living by himself in the Camp he used to make seats and lamp-stands.
And it came to pass one day whilst the blessed, man Apa Victor was living in exile that the Lord Jesus came to him. Now He had changed His apparel (or, form),
and had taken the appearance of a grey-headed old man, who had come thither from a far-distant place.
And He knocked at the gate of the Camp,
and Apa Victor came outside
and when he saw the grey-headed old man he was filled with sorrow and compassion for Him
and he kissed Him, saying,
Come inside, O my lord brother, Thou good man; it seemeth to me as if I had seen Jesus this day.
And Apa Victor did not know who the old man was
and the two of them went into the tower wherein Victor lived.
Then Apa Victor said unto the man,
Let us offer up prayer to God'
and Jesus said unto him,
 Let us offer up prayer
And Apa Victor said unto Him,
Do Thou stand up first, because Thou art greater than I, and Thou art (more) holy (than I). I am nineteen years old this day,
and the sign of this world hath not as yet ceased, to manifest itself in my body, and the wickedness of this world hath not entirely disappeared from my heart.
And Jesus said unto him,
Forgive me, O my brother! I will stand up (and pray).'
And Jesus and Apa Victor spread out their hands,
and it came to pass that as they were praying the ten fingers of Jesus became ten lamps of fire which penetrated to the throne of the Father.
And it came to pass that when they had finished praying Apa Victor went forward and saluted Jesus — now he knew not who lie was — and he said unto Him
Sit Thou down so that I may be able to enjoy thy face fully, for behold, it is a very long time since I have seen a man. And I adjure Thee to inform me truthfully of what place Thou art a native, so that I may know whether Thou art a native of my own city (or not)
And Jesus said unto Him,
Thou art a Roman (Greek?) of Cilicia.
Thy father is Romanus and thy mother is Martha, and the wife whom they betrothed to thee is Theonoe; but God hath chosen thee for Himself
And Apa Victor wept in His face, and said unto Him,
O my brother, great is Thy faith.
I see that Thou art a prophet, or perhaps Thou art an angel of God.
But tell me news about my house (or, home), for behold, it is a very long time since I departed from my country.
And Jesus answered (and said)
O my brother, shew an act of lovingkindness to me, and give me a cake of bread, so that I may eat it, for it is seven days since I ate food.
And Apa Victor said unto Him
In truth, O my brother, this day is the fortieth day in which nothing hath entered my mouth, and for forty days I have not taken my clothes off my body.
And as the Lord liveth I have neither bread nor water in this wilderness, nor anything whatsoever which hath the appearance of food.
But now, O my brother, rise up, take this lamp-stand and these seats (or, stools), and also my shoe latchet, and go Thou into the city which is near and sell them at their (proper) price, and buy us some bread that we may eat, lest our souls decay through weakness.
And Jesus answered and said unto him, 'Where in this wilderness dost thou find a man with whom to hold converse? And who is it that taketh care to provide thee with food?
And Apa Victor answered and said unto Him,
Woe be unto me, O my brother! (Long will it be) before I shall arrive in that other world wherein no respect of persons is shewn. Mayest Thou find it. My Lord the Christ dwelleth there, the Apostles and the Patriarchs dwell there, and thousands of thousands, and tens of thousands of tens of thousands stand round about it.
And if any man who is a sinner shall arrive therein lie shall not find boldness (or, freedom of speech) therein, because of the sins which he hath committed, both those committed during the day and those committed during the night
As for me, how wretched shall I be in that hour! Woe is me, because of the ignorance which hath been set in the hearts of men, whereby each one faileth to remember death until the moment when it overtaketh him before he knoweth it!
Woe is me, for I have made supplication to death, but I have not found it.
 I have begged that some sickness might attack me, but it hath not done so.
Thou knowest, O my Lord, that I have made entreaty for my death more than for my life, for I am without father and without mother in this world.
I bear witness by my Lord Jesus the Christ, that if Thou departest from me this day, Thou shalt come back again and shalt visit me.
I am the servant which is unprofitable.
When I shall die Thou shalt bury my body, lest it remain lying about in this world, wherein there is no man whatsoever who shall keep me in remembrance.
Then Jesus had compassion upon Apa Victor, and He looked upon him as he wept,
and said unto him,
Dost thou know Who I am?
I am he Who delivered thee from the rack of torture at Rakote.
I am He Who delivered thee from the iron bed.
I am He Who kept thee in safety in the furnace of the bath.
I am Jesus the Christ, Who delivered thee from all thy tribulations.
I will be with thee in every place whither thou shalt go.
Grieve thou not because thou art living in this wilderness.
Amen, I say unto thee, that thou shalt be with Ale in the Jerusalem of heaven, My beloved city. And as I shall take My seat upon My throne, thou also shalt sit upon thy throne.
thou also shalt sit upon thy throne. And I will make every tyrant (or. governor) and every ruler to hold in wonder thy name whensoever they shall hear it.
And I will make them to come to thy shrine and to bring gifts unto thee in My Name.
I will make many mighty wonders and signs to become manifest at thy shrine.
Whosoever shall come to thy shrine, and shall make a vow, and shall not pay the same, because of these unpaid vows will I enter into judgement with them.
As for this tower wherein thou dwellest, the multitudes who shall come thereto shall not destroy it, (The story of) thy life and conversation and of thy great valour shall reach the uttermost ends of the earth.
This year shalt thou dwell in exile, but in the next year they shall cut off thy head with the sword in this Camp
for thou shalt suffer certain pains for My Names sake.
And I will come unto thee again, and I will give thee strength until thou shalt have put to shame the Duke and his torturings.
And straightway Apa Victor cast himself down at the feet of the Lord, saying
Who am I, that I should be deemed worthy by Thee for Thee to speak to, O my Lord?
And Jesus kissed him, and He departed into heaven, and the angels sang hymns to Him.
And Apa Victor continued to live in the Camp, and the Lord Jesus was with him.
And Apa Victor purchased for himself the materials for his burial, and his coffin.
And large numbers of soldiers flocked to the Camp for the sake of the blessed man Apa Victor.
And the blessed man Apa Victor doubled the number of the prayers which he used to make, and he ke2)t fasts for very long periods, and he diligently observed the Sabbaths, and the Lord Jesus was with him. In the peace of God, May His holy blessing be with us! Amen
And Sebastianus, the Duke, came to inspect the Camp.
And Asterius, the praetor of the Camp, cast himself down before the Count, and Soterichos, who was the accountant (or, clerk), gave him a written statement concerning Apa Victor, so that he might summon him into his presence.
Then the Duke ordered his servants to set his judgement throne inside the gate of the Camp, in order that he might hear (the case of) the holy man Apa Victor.
And when the morning had come the Duke took his seat upon the throne, and he commanded his servants to bring the righteous man into his presence.
And the torturers seized Apa Victor whilst he was in his cell, and he had lentils in his hand, and he was eating
 and Apa Victor threw the lentils through the window, saying
O my Lord Jesus the Christ, do Thou make these lentils to become stones which shall never be destroyed! And they shall be a sign unto all the generations which are to come, lest these wicked men tread them down.'
And Apa Victor prayed, saying,
O my Lord Jesus the Christ, let me not be put to shame before this wicked man.'
And afterwards he came down (from his cell), and stood before the Duke.
And the Duke said unto him,
These are the letters which the Emperor hath sent to be read unto thee; hearken unto them, and offer up sacrifice.'
Verily, I know well that I did receive a salary of sixty from my father, who is a general, and that God hated me because I received these things wickedly.
Now therefore, O Duke, neither gold nor silver will be of the least value to a man in the hour of his necessity.
For this reason let us fight with ourselves, for forgetfulness hath spread itself over our heart, so that we may never cease to remember the death (which cometh) in this world.
I have never glorified myself, and I have never exalted myself.
For this reason that which is written is fulfilled in me: 'He who exalteth himself shall be abased, and he who abaseth himself shall be exalted.'
Then Sebastianus was exceedingly wroth, and he said unto Apa Victor, 'Offer up sacrifice.'
 And Apa Victor answered and said, 'I will not offer up sacrifice.
Whatsoever thou wishest to do unto me that do.
I fell into the hands of the four torturers (?) before this, and I was not afraid of them, for the Lord gave me strength during all my torturings.
Now therefore, O Duke, I was banished to this spot because of this Name, for (they said), 'Offer up sacrifice,'
(and I would not do so). And, moreover, I do not wish to remain in this world which shall dissolve away and perish.
Be it known unto thee also, O Duke, that if thou put me to the torture many, many times, thou wilt only give additional strength to the reasoning power of the mind which is within me.
Wholly fitting for me is it that I should be held worthy to endure revilings for the Name of the Christ.'
And the Duke said unto Apa Victor,
Cease thy say; thou art always talking!
Art thou a deacon, or a reader, that thou possessest such perfect knowledge of this (kind) of wisdom?
If the blessed man Paul, the Apostle of the Gentiles,
this angel who belonged to the earth,
this man who belonged to the heavens,
who was by reason of his love and zeal well nigh the equal of Christ,
who bore the care of the Churches,
and, moreover, if this holy man, who possessed in his own person so great a multitude of spiritual excellences, and who spake out boldly, saying, 'I know not how to do anything of myself,'
was afraid, and spake in a manner,
what shall we ourselves do, who are miserable creatures, and who are wholly unable to cultivate successfully one spiritual excellence?
It is not then seemly for us to keep watch and to pray at all times, 'and to make petitions to God neither for gold not silver, nor for any riches of this world, but only for riches which are in the heavens;
Now, there are certain folk who rejoice in [their] wealth;
and some rejoice in wine-drinkings in taverns, and in eating at feasts,
For this reason it is seemly for us to take strict care of our souls at all times,
and we must say as did the Holy man David, 'God giveth strength to my beauty,'
But even if it be thy spiritual excellence flourisheth, take good heed that thy heart but not over-exalted because of thy beauty,
lest God turn His face away from thee because of thine exaltation of heart (or, pride).
He Who gave food unto all flesh fasted in the flesh for thy sake
He Who created the sweetness in the honey
 tasted that which was bitter (gall) for thy sake.
He Who ornamented the heavens with the companies of the stars
wore a crown of thorns for thy sake;
and He became obedient even unto death,
the death of the Cross.
It is not, then, seemly for us to shew ourselves glad because of these things,
nay, we must make ourselves to lament, and we must weep. Let us hearken unto that which [the Book] saith, '[Be] sorrowful in heart upon your beds
because of the things which ye have said in your hearts [during the day],' so that we may have in remembrance in the night season, and that we may heave sighs concerning them.
This is what Ahab did when he was in sorrow:
he fasted and he girded sackcloth about his body.
And what did God say concerning him? 'I will not bring the evil upon him in his days.'
It was for this same reason that the Saviour proclaimed to be blessed who weep,
not those who weep for the dead, or the loss of property,
but those who weep for their sins.
Though thyself shalt say even as did David, 'Night after night I wash my bed,
and I soak my cushion[s] with my tears.' 'Wash though away the defilement by means of tears,
smite upon thy breast,
and take to thyself the remembrance of the sins
which though hast committed.
[If] though hast been snared at [any] time through thine eye,
if though hast opened thy window at [any] time wickedly,
thou hast done injury to thy soul through thine eye.
The eyes which look with wicked intent
heal thou now with tears,
and shut thou thy window that thou mayest not see again the things of vanity,
for otherwise, thou wilt fall into an evil habit.
Now habit is wont to draw him that clingeth thereto into great sins.
[When] though hast arrived thyself splendid apparel 'take good heed unto thyself not to sit down in any [dirty] place, 'lest it become spotted.
If thou shalt hold to be in a light matter the first stain, and the second, and the third, at length thy whole garment shall become dirty.
'Thou shalt not be careless [and] sit down in any polluted place whatsoever.
What are we to do then? [Thou hast] need to fervent prayer,
lest thou strike a stone with thy feet.
And [thou shalt pray fervently] that the Angel shall compass three round about, and shall deliver thee. And thou thyself shalt be strong and shalt say, 'The Angel who delivered me out of evil,'
'And [thou shalt pray fervently] that the Angel may cry out unto thee from heaven, even as [he cried] to Abraham,
for the Angels love those who love their own God.
He (i.e., the Book) saith moreover, 'Take a psalm, set ye forth a tabret,
a sweet psaltry and a harp';
thou art to take one thing, and three are demanded from thee.
For we are composed of three things, even as the Apostle [Paul] spake, 'He will keep safe him that is in the spirit, and He will make healthy your souls and your bodies.'
Now the psaltery is in the spirit,
the harp is in the soul,
and the tabret is the dead skin which covereth it.
Therefore, put thou to death the flesh,
and this shalt thou make thyself strong to ascribe blessings to God with the tabret and dance.
For it is God Himself Who hath filled thee with flesh.
Observe, therefore, lest He should say unto thee, 'What profit is there in My blood?'
What kind of recompense canst thou possibly make to Him which shall be adequate for all the sufferings which He endured on thy behalf?
Be thou a tree which beareth fruit, and thus shall thou cause the blessing of God to be upon thee.
Bring forth fruit according to thy strength
If thou art not able to bring forth an hundredfold, which is the [number of] perfection, then bring forth sixtyfold, which is the half thereof;
If thou cast not be a vessel of gold, or silver, do not become a log of wood, or grass, or straw, which are merely fuel for the burning.
Thou shall not perform the works which God hateth, for they shall take their stand before thee on the Day of Judgement like solid image(s).
And finally thou wilt have to begin to confess them in that place without witnesses
and without an advocate, and without proofs,
and thou wilt have to look upon the deeds
which thou hast uttered unwittingly, and they shall stand up like statues before thine eyes.
So long then as we have the time let us do work,
for if the time slip through our hands,
'it is unlikely that we shall find another opportunity.
Let us then weep over the deeds which we have committted unrighteosly,
and let us make tears to flow down our cheeks in streams, and let us beat our breasts in sorrow,
'so that we may do away with the weeping , and the gnashing of the teeth in that place whereto we mus depart.
'Moreover, let us weep even as did David
in order that we may be proclaimed blessed. He did not shed a few tears only as men do when they weep,
but he flooded his bed with his tears; and he passed the whole night in vigil.
One night only he sinned,
Since, therefore, I have gone astray through mine eyes,
for this reason do away my sins through [my] tears.'
Let us come forth from our habits which are evil, , and remove ourselves into the city which is in the heavens.
'Let the careful consideration of the words of God reduce to peace the delights of the senses which are engrained in our hearts,
and which resemble those that are found in wild animals,
and let us bear at all times the death of our Lord Jesus Christ in our bodies,
The man that slumbereth shall not receive the crown of victory,
and the man that is careless and idle shall not receive the prize,
but the man who hath borne innumerable buffetings and wounds is he who shall receive honour from the Master of the contest.
Now the Enemy is in the habit of taking to flight before him that is prudent (or, cautious), but help undereth him that slumbereth.
Therefore, thou must know that thou hast about thee enemies which are evil.
Give, therefore, no sleep to thine eyes,
nor slumber to thine eyelids,
that thou mayest escape like a roe from the snare of the hunter, and like a bird from the net of the fowler.
Let us flee at all times from the cares of this world (or, life), and from the burdens thereof.
If we would make ourselves to be free from this world, we must not make to ourselves care for the things of the world,
'Flee from the knavery of the Crafty One,
and thou shalt say, ' Through Thee shall I be delivered from a company of thieves,
and through my God I shall leap over a wall.'
Seek not to excuse thyself from suffering, lest by so doing thou shalt excuse thyself from the crown also.
The merchant loseth not courage, but he endureth even the waves of the sea, and he findeth possessions.
He who contendeth is wont to fight in pain and suffering even unto wounds, for his heart looketh for the crown of victory.
The husbandman doth not find ears of corn [in his tillage] | unless he hath first of all sown the seed [thereof] by his own toil.
This is what is to be expected from the kingdom which is in the heavens: : men must account tribulations as nothing whatsoever, and they must fortify their hearts by means of the hope of the good things which shall come.
Let us therefore devote our whole attention to watching at all times, so that when our Bridegroom shall return, , and look in the bride-chamber,
If they shall cut asunder him that saith, ' My master tarrieth,' what shall they do unto him that doth not expect to see him at all?
Therefore, O my beloved, what is meet for us to do is this: We must act in such a way that we may find ourselves prepared at any hour, and we must sail a straightforward course, and always in the same direction;
for it is unlikely that we shall be able to turn back again and cultivate successfully that concerning which we have been careless.
Let us therefore be prepared at any hour, so that we may say with boldness, ' Lord, my heart is ready, my heart is ready.’
’ In this life we are in a mighty war.
The workers of evil, who are the demons, stretch their bows.
Then one of them shooteth an arrow into our ears, so that we may listen to slanderous chatterings with pleasure.
And another shooteth an arrow into our eyes, so that we may turn our gaze in a wrongful manner towards the things which are unseemly.
And another shooteth an arrow into our tongue, so as to make us to revile scornfully our brother.
And another shooteth an arrow into our belly, which exciteth in us the appetite of gluttony.
And another shooteth an arrow into our hands, which leadeth us on to deeds of rapine, and greed of the most excessive character.
Because of all these things the blessed man Paul armed us with weapons,
for he wrote saying, 'Take unto you the whole armour of God, and the helmet of the Spirit.
With these ye shall be able to quench every fiery dart of the Evil One'
Let us hearken unto the voice of the prophet, which saith, ' He hath shewed thee, O man, what is good ;
and also that which God seeketh after at thy hands, to make thyself to perform judgement and righteousness.
And thou shalt love mercy, and to prepare to follow closely after the Lord thy God.'
and sometimes He teacheth us obedience, and He bestoweth rewards upon those who hearken unto Him.
Therefore we must gird up the loins of our heart(s) in truth.
Let us keep in remembrance all the things which He suffered for our sakes.
He was made after the manner of a man for our sakes. He was suckled at the breast like a man.
He was suckled at the breast like a man. He made Himself to be a child in age (or, stature).
He received baptism for our sakes.
He suffered hunger. He slept, He slumbered for our sakes.
Let us, then, think at all times on all these things which He suffered patiently for the sake of our sins,
(and) that (the Book) saith, Ye have not yet resisted unto blood, (striving against sin).'
But ye shall fight against sin, that is to say, although we are not now asked to give our blood for the sake of Christ,
He made the blind to see, besides all these other healiugs which we put aside and do not attempt and describe one by one.
in a manner suitable for the place wherein our names are inscribed.
Now the Scripture hath called us ' strangers and sojourners ', so that we may think scorn of the things of this place (i. e., world).
The pleasure of this world is like unto a day (Coptic reads: dog):
if we chase him away, he fleeth; and if we feed him, he will abide with thee.
It is for this reason that Aiakk6bos (James) said, 'Resist ye the j Devil, and he shall flee from you.'
Let us not think in our minds that we shall be able to repent in Amente,
 for the medicine of repentance hath no effect in that place.
For although we shall gnash with our teeth, and our tongue shall be on fire, there shall be in that place none who shall dip his finger in water for us;
on the contrary, we ourselves shall hear the words which the rich man heard.
Let us know, then, O my beloved, that the works of this changing (world) are nothing but phantasms (or, dreams), and that we live in a house wherein travellers are received, out from which we must go forth in any case.
Let us take care concerning the road, and concerning the provisions which we must take with us on the road.
Let us array ourselves in the garments which appertain to this life, concerning which Paul counselled us, saying, 'Dress yourselves in the bowels of mercies, and in goodness, and in humility'
In that place we shall have no need of gold, but we shall have need of the dropping of water.
We shall have no need of the leaves of trees and plants, but of the fruit thereof. We shall have no need of words, but of deeds.
For He (i. e., Christ) said, ' It is not every one who shall say unto Me, Lord, Lord, that shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he who doeth the Will of My Father which (is) in heaven/
Let us therefore by no manner of means deceive ourselves.
For in this world both the good things and the evil things which are therein fulfil themselves.
In that world, however, the good things endure, and exist for ever and for ever, and the punishments are endless.
In this world, if the body burnetii, the soul cometh forth therefrom, and it existeth undestroyed.
If a man be unable to bear the heat of the bath which hath been heated to an unwonted degree, what will he do when he is delivered over to the river of fire which floweth before the throne of Christ?
It is necessary that every man should make himself to consider the fire which is there.
Let us examine carefully the seal which is on our gold and see that it is intact, lest peradventure some come and plunder our treasure.
If the prophet Jeremiah wept over the overthrow of the temple, which had been built throughout with stones of price, saying, ' Leave me alone, let me weep bitterly,' how much more is it right for us to weep over the temple of ourselves, which is exceedingly glorious,
If we look upon one who is dead, we weep over him according to custom, what man is there who would be altogether so foolish as not to weep for his own soul if it had died in sin?
Remember thou, then, that the time hath drawn nigh,
Let us rise up out of the slumber of dreams, and let us make (or, bring forth) fruits worthy of repentance, even as it is written.
Repentance requireth not a long time, and very many of the martyrs received the crown for (the repentance) of a short time.
And moreover, it belongeth to the nature of men to go astray in the work,
but it is the work of Satan to persist in the going astray.
For this reason our God cried out to us through the prophet saying, 'Is there no balsam in Gilead?
Or is there no physician in that place?
Why then hath not the healing of the daughter of my people increased?'
If it should happen that any member in our body become diseased, are we not wont to send for the physicians, and to make all the haste possible until we have healed that sick member in our body?
When, however, the soul itself is sick we are careless about it, and we take no care whatsoever about the healing thereof.
Let us hold in fear Him that hath the power to destroy our soul and our body in Gehenna.
The Good Shepherd standeth wishing to snatch away our souls from out of the mouth of the lion before he is able to devour them.
He crieth out unto us ourselves saying, 'My son, thou hast sinned; do not (sin) again'
And again He saith, Shall not he who falleth rise up again?
Or shall not he who hath gone astray turn again into the right way?'
And again He saith, 'Turn ye yourselves unto Me, My children (or, sons) who have wandered afar off, and I will heal your wounds of contrition.'
He was no liar who said, 'I have not come to judge the world, but in order that the world might have salvation through Me'
The one thing for us to do is to repent.
For He saith, 'I do not desire the death of the sinner, but that he would turn himself from his evil way, and live'
as that in which God loveth the soul which repenteth.
For the lovingkindness of God towards man is in this wise:
He never rejecteth him that setteth forth to come to Him with repentance.
And if he hath fallen into the ditch, and into evil, yet will He stretch out widely His hands to him saying, ' Turn thou to Me, and I will save thee'
Doth there exist a physician who, supposing it to be his wish to make him that is sick to recover a little, would reproach him
The physician doth not treat him with contempt, neither doth he award him the just retribution for his disgraceful state, but he administereth unto him the medicine with gentleness.
How much more then shall God, Who is in truth the Good Physician of our souls (act thus towards us)?
Above all things let us not despair of our own salvation.
For he who contendeth in the games is wont to fall down often, but in the end he riseth up, and receiveththe crown of victory.
So also is it with the soldier. After he hath been wounded (the physicians) heal him, and he wageth war again, and men consider him to be of greater value than those who have not been wounded at all.
Similarly also there are very many merchants who, although their ships have foundered, and they have lost their cargoes, do not despair,
but they go back again regularly to the markets,
For the burning fire of Gehenna hath not been prepared solely for us, but it was made ready for the Devil and his angels.
Above all things let us not kindle that fire for ourselves, and let us not hear besides the words, (Get ye into the fire which ye yourselves have kindled)
There is no sick man living who cannot be healed by the medicine of the Physician of our souls.
But perhaps thou wilt say, ' I certainly cannot attain unto perfection.'
If thou art not able to attain unto perfection, and if thou art not able to become like a sun, then make thyself to be like unto a star.
In any case transfer thyself from earth to heaven. Make thyself to be like a star which sendeth forth light.
how much more shall He give us wages for our good works, even though they be very few?
Therefore let us labour for a little time, so that we may at last live the life which is for ever.
If it were possible for us to die many, many times, it would be seemly for us to do so, so that we might see Christ coming in His glory.
We shall not see Him in a riddle, but we shall | see Him as He really is, with our own eyes, according to the testimony of the Apostle John, who preached concerning God.
If we look upon the beauty of the human body in this place (i. e., world) we are wont to marvel thereat.
Now the beauty of human bodies ariseth from humours and from heat, which after death turn into worms, and ashes, and corruption.
How much more, then, shall we admire when we look upon that beauty which is incorruptible, and spotless, and pure?
Since Peter, when he saw only the very smallest portion of the light of the glory
thereof, said, 'It is good for us to remain in this place'
what shall happen unto us when we shall look upon the fullness of that glory?
If we ascribe blessings to those who are nigh unto a king in this world, when we see him advancing upon a chariot of gold, and wearing the crown and apparel of purple, then how greatly blessed shall we be when we are placed on the right hand of the King of All, the Judge of every man.
Now supposing that a kingdom had been promised unto thee, and that the road to the country wherein the kingdom was situated was exceedingly difficult, and toilsome, and was a place of desolation and steepness : wouldst thou not endure all these things in order to reach that kingdom?
Thou shalt not say, I am already snared in my sins, and I am not able to turn myself to God/
for even if the Devil hath first of all cast us down headlong, let us rise up quickly.
For our God is a lover of mankind.
Whomsoever shall flee unto Him He will receive, even as He did in the case of the young man who had squandered the portion of the riches which had fallen to his share.
Let no whoremonger and tax-gatherer be before us to enter into the Kingdom.
There are many medicines and many remedies established for us in Holy Scripture which are different each from the other.
Ahab sorrowed in his heart because of the sin which he had committed, and he escaped from the wrath of God by means of this medicine. And Nebuchadnezzar (βαλτασαρ) (escaped) through mercy.
The thief became a citizen of the Paradise through faith
Therefore will we exalt these salves and these medicines.
Let us ourselves say unto the True Physician, 'Heal me, O God, and I shall become whole and Heal my soul, for I have sinned against Thee'
and the True Physician shall receive us to Himself. And He shall say, I, even I, am He Who blotteth out thy sin, and I will no more remember it'
and if thou canst not wash away thy sins by means of thy tears like the harlot, flee thou to the foot of the Merciful, and thou thyself shalt say, with David, 'Have mercy upon me, O God, according to the greatness of Thy mercy.'
For this reason I am in need of the greatness of the mercy of Thy lovingkindness towards man.
Nevertheless, thou must certainly shew Him thy wound, and thou shalt say, ' Have mercy upon me. Have mercy upon my body, and upon my soul.
Behold, He Himself will sell unto thee the kingdom which is in the heavens.
If thou art not able to buy it for copper (money), buy it for thyself with a little piece of bread, for He will sell thee the kingdom which is in the heavens for this.
Now he who seeketh after that which is sold may not have with him the means (or, possessions) to give in exchange for it.
If (thou hast) not (these things), then give the innocence of thy soul, give fastings, give tears.
If thou dost fast, guard thyself lest thy heart become proud;
Nay, more (than this). If the day of fasting shall cause thee to be regarded (by men) with close attention, thou shalt consider what it is which thou hast acquired for thyself through the fasting, lest thou find thyself to be on a lower level than before thou didst fast.
Moreover, observe what kind of sin it is which thou hast abandoned, or for what purpose thou hast abandoned it,
and what kind of success it is which thou hast acquired for thyself,
or what manner of defect it is which thou hast corrected through thy fasting.
See if thou hast cured thyself of cursing and swearing, and if thou hast laid aside words of obscenity, or words of ribaldry, or words of lewdness.
See what manner of good thing* it is which thou hast gotten for thyself.
If thou hast abandoned (the eating of) bread overmuch, and of other kinds of food, but hast not abandoned passion, nor hast gotten for thyself spiritual excellences, in what way then hast thou benefited by the fasting?
In that Other World one man shall not be able to give help to another, and no man shall be able to deliver himself from the decision of the Judge, wherefrom no escape may be obtained by supplication.
In that place of judgement neither Moses, nor Noah, nor Daniel, nor even Abraham himself, the lover of children, shall be able to protect one of his children from the punishment.
Let us keep in remembrance the fact that we are guilty of very many sins, both of those which are secret and of those which are manifest.
Now, he (i. e., David) saith, ' If thou shalt mark carefully every iniquity, who is there that shall stand?
And why need I speak of the sins which are hidden?
If He were to judge us only for those which are manifest, what chance of escape would there be for us?
Now when we talk with our friends we are in the habit of addressing them with the greatest respect and deference, but when we pray to God Himself for our sins we habitually do this with carelessness,
If, moreover, He were to bring forward (or, into the midst) the charges which we have uttered against each other, and the jealousy, and the hatred, what should we do?
 should we ever be able to look boldly into heaven at all?
If He were to look closely into our behaviour in respect of the acts of deceit which we have done to each other, and of how, when our brother was present with us, we held converse with him as a friend,
but when he was absent we heaped abuse of every kind upon him as if he had been an enemy (what should we do?).
should we not be condemned to most severe punishment because of our behaviour in this respect.
If He were to exact punishment from us for our carelessness in our assemblies for the Holy Communion, wherein God Himself speaketh to us in the Scriptures,
but we pay no attention to Him, and we hold converse with our fellow-servants,
should we not then be condemned to a punishment of great severity, because of our behaviour in this respect?
For this reason let us set Gehenna before our eyes at all seasons.
And even if we had not been threatened definitely with Gehenna, it would have been meet for us to keep our sins in our memory at all times, (and seeing that) this Gehenna is ready for us, how much more are we bound to keep our sins in remembrance?
Remember thou the Judge.
For behold, he (i. e., the Book) spake unto thee aforetime concerning the punishment so that thou mightest make thy escape from the danger.
If He were to command thee saying, Fast thou thou couldst find an excuse for not doing so in thy weakness.
If He were to say unto thee, 'Give money in charity thou couldst find an excuse for not doing so in thy poverty.
If He were to say unto thee, Collect nothing in this world thou couldst find an excuse in the necessity for providing for thy son.
But if He were to say unto thee, ' Be not angry, bear no malice against, have no hatred for, treat not with contumely him that is thy neighbour,' what wouldst thou reply in respect of these things?
Moreover, on many occasions thou hast said, 'They have treated me unjustly, they have defrauded me of my property, they have done me an injury, and they have spoken evil things against me ';
but thou hadst only to wait for the decision of the governor.
How much more is it meet for thee to leave the matter unto Him Who said, 'Cast the judgement upon Me ; I will repay, saith God.'
Thou knowest, therefore, that it will be necessary for thee to take thy stand before the Awful Throne, where neither advocate nor possessions shall be able to assist thee,
and that thy soul shall come forth on the ' river of flame which floweth before the throne of Christ ',
even as the fathers say who have been in that place before thee.
Let the fountain of thy tears be in size according to the measure of the sins which thou hast committed.
If thy sins be few, then a little shedding of tears will suffice.
If thy transgression be great, then thou wilt have need of overwhelming torrents of tears.
If, however, thou thyself art free from sin, then shed thou thy tears on behalf of thy brother to a suitable degree, and weep with him for his sins.
Let us repent before the door of repentance be shut in our teeth (or, mouth).
For this reason (was said) that which was said, ' Let him that thinketh he standeth look carefully lest he fall.'
Let him that is in a slippery place, and hath fallen, make haste to rise up (again), for he must not abandon himself to despair.
For it is written, ' God upholdeth those who fall'
And it happeneth that a man moveth sometimes a very little, according to that which and my feet would have moved ; and very little more and my steps would have slipped
Then again, ' They thrust sore at me to make me fall, but God gave me [His] hand
He who hath fallen hath, in these ensamples, an encouragement not to allow himself to remain | in his fallen state, and he (i.e., the Book) saith, ' Shall not he that is in the habit of falling rise up again?
Verily it is written, God, the True Judge, is longsuffering and merciful';
and He receiveth (or, accepteth) the repentance of those who shall turn unto Him, as one Who loveth men.
Listen, for the Book saith l He will sharpen it
Now hitherto He hath not made use of it to smite, for He thought that when thou didst see Him sharpening His sword,
thou wouldst anticipate the passing of the sentence, and that fear would rouse thee up to repentance.
For the Book saith, He hath stretched His bow, He hath made it ready.'
Because thou hast not yet seen the arrow, presume not on the mercifulness of the Judge.
Listen to (the words of) longsuffering of the Saviour Who said, 'Agree thou with him that goeth to law with thee Now the adversary, that is to say, he that fighteth with thee, is with thee at all times.
And that it is unlikely that thou wilt be able to rid thyself of him Paul teacheth thee saying, The flesh lusteth against our spirit, and the spirit against the flesh; these, moreover, war against each other.'
Now the spirit warreth against the flesh, and it bringeth into subjection the lust of this world through the hope of the kingdom which is in the heavens.
THE LIFE AND CONVERSATION OF OUR HOLY FATHER, WHO WAS GLORIOUS IN EVERY WAY, APA ONNOPHRIOS THE ANCHORITE, WHO ENDED HIS LIFE ON THE SIXTEENTH DAY OF THE MONTH PAONE IN THE PEACE OF GOD!
BLESS US! AMEN.
A CERTAIN brother who was an anchorite, and whose name was Apa Pa[p]noute, made a discourse to the God-loving brethren,
and these were the words which he addressed to them. I, [your] brother, was thinking one day, and I determined to go into the inner desert, so that I might see if there were any brethren who were monks living in the most remote parts of it.
I marched four days and four nights, and I neither ate bread nor drank water. I marched on into the inner desert,
and at the end of a [further number] of days I came upon a cave.
And when he had gazed upon me he repeated the prayer in the Gospel.
And I urged him to take me into the cave.
And he asked me 'Wherefore didst thou come to this place?'
And I said, 'I came to this place because I wished to see the servants of God who live in this desert, and God hath not denied me that which I asked of Him.'
And I asked him, saying, ' How didst thou come to this place? And how long ago is it since thou didst come here? And what dost thou usually eat? And why dost thou go naked and wear no € clothing on thy body?
Afterwards I meditated in my heart upon what I had done, and I grieved, and wept exceedingly, and I was always heaving sighs.
Afterwards I meditated in my heart upon what I had done, and I grieved, and wept exceedingly, and I was always heaving sighs.
And I thought in my heart when I was alone, saying, ‘If I were to die to-day or to-morrow they would punish us with a severe punishment, with the gnashing of teeth, and with outer darkness, and with the fire that cannot be quenched, and with the worm that never sleepeth, and that devoureth the soul.
And I wished to escape from the sin.
And I rose up and came forth, and I departed into the desert,
and I have never been with that woman since I have been here.
And I found this spring- of water, and this palm tree, and this cave.
This palm-tree yieldeth twelve bunches of dates each year, a bunch for each month,
and one bunch of dates is sufficient to last me for the month.
I possess nothing, neither raiment nor the food of bread.
My hair increaseth, and as my clothes were worn out utterly long ago,
I clothe myself, as is most seemly, with the raiment of my hair.
And behold, it is thirty years since I came to this place, and the climate thereof bestoweth upon me health uniformly. And I never eat bread.'
And I asked him, 'At first when thou didst come to this place, didst thou suffer greatly?'
And he said unto me, 'Yea, I did suffer greatly, so much so in fact that sometimes through the intensity of my sorrow I used to throw myself on the ground, and cry up to God because of my manifold sins.
And I also suffered great pain through an infirmity which was upon me.
 [One day] I looked and I saw a man who was exceedingly splendid standing by me,
and he said unto me, “In what part of the body art thou ill?”
And my strength returned unto me a little, and I said unto him, “I am ill in my liver.”
And he said unto me, “Shew me the place wherein thou art ill,”
and I shewed him the place where my liver was in pain.
And he stretched out his hand upon me, and his fingers rested upon each other, and he made an opening between mⲩ ribs as with a sword (or, knife), and he brought forth my liver, and he shewed me the wounds that were in it,
And I cast myself down at his feet so that he might remember and bless me.
And he blessed me, saying,' The Lord bless thee! May He deliver thee from the snares of the Devil, and may He set thee on all His good paths at all times, and mayest thou escape to the saints.”
And when he had finished blessing me my strength came to me to such a degree that I never felt when I was hungry or when I was thirsty.
And when I perceived the great marvel that had come to me I rose up, and I journeyed into the mountain.
And when four days had passed by I felt pain, and I stretched out my hands to heaven,
and I prayed, and behold the man who had come unto me at first again came unto me,
and he gave unto me strength as at the first.
In short, when four days had passed I journeyed on into [the desert].
And straightway I looked, and I saw a man in the distance, and he was an exceedingly terrifying object, for his hair was spread out over his body like that of a panther, and he was naked, and his privy parts were covered with leaves.
I also am a man of the mountain like unto thyself, and I am living in the desert because of my sins.'
And he said unto me, ' Thou art a friend (?) of God.'
And I sat down before him, and I conjured him to tell me his name.
And he said unto me, 'Onnophrios is my name. And behold, I have lived in this desert for sixty years. I wander about in the mountains like the wild animals, and I never see any man who recognizeth me.
I lived at one time in a habitation of monks, in the mountain of Shmun of the Thebaid.
And the name of that monastery was Erete.
We all lived together, and each of us was of the same mind, and peace dwelt in our midst. We lived with each other a life of quiet contemplation, and we ascribed glory unto God.
And I passed nights in vigil with them, and I learned the rules of God from them; and their chief men were perfect even as the angels of the Lord.
And I heard them speaking about our father Elijah, the Tishbite, and saying that he was wholly powerful in God while he lived in this desert .
John the Baptist also, than whom of all those who have been born of women none hath arisen who is greater than he. He lived in the desert-places until the day of his manifestation before Israel.
Then the Duke made his servants to strip Apa Victor naked, and to cut his sinews, and to fasten his hands behind him, and to drive skewers into him
and afterwards he made them to dismember (?) him.
And the Duke said unto him, 'Offer up sacrifice.'
And Apa Victor said unto him, 'I will not offer up sacrifice.'
And afterwards he made his servants to break the joints of his legs and arms until his bones stuck out through his skin.
And Apa Victor said unto him,
I give thanks unto Thee, O my Lord Jesus the Christ, because all the joy of the Christ hath drawn nigh unto me.'
Duke said unto him,
They delivered thee over into my hands as a magician.
Now, then, if thou dost not hearken unto me, I will torture thee with the most terrible tortures.'
And Apa Victor said, 'I will not offer up sacrifice.'
And the Duke said unto him,
Why dost thou not go on taking thy salary? Why dost thou take no pleasure in thy chariot and in thine armour?'
And Apa Victor answered and said,
Because they are used in acts of violence.
For this reason I will not eat the rations
I have in the world which is to come spiritual food laid up fox me, and when I shall have eaten thereof I shall never feel hunger again.'
And the Duke commanded them to strip him naked, and to east him into a furnace wherein the fire had been lighted for two days.
And afterwards they brought him into the presence of the Duke, who said unto him,
O wicked head! I swear by the health of Apollo that thy punishment shall be the destruction of thy body by fire.'
And the Duke commanded (his servants) to prepare a furnace, and to heat it for four days, and then to cast Apa Victor into it.
And Apa Victor prayed in the depths of the furnace, saying,
O my Lord Jesus the Christ, at the (mention of) Whose Name the sea dried up, let [this] fire be extinguished, and let the heat thereof be destroyed. Blessed be Thy Name for ever! Amen.'
And they brought him and set him before the Duke, (and it was found that) the fire had not touched him.
Then Sebastianus said unto Apa Victor,
By the glorious gods Apollo and Artemis, I will torture thee (sorely),
I will Send and bring a magician who is more powerful than thou, (and) he shall make an end of thy magic'
And the Duke commandcd them to bring a magician.
And the magician (came), and he made medicaments (containing) the essence and the venom of serpents,
and he pronounced over them a very large number of (magical) names.
And after (this) he said unto Apa Victor,
Take (these), swallow them, and then I shall see if thou art strong enough (to suffer in no way thereby).'
And the blessed man Apa Victor said unto the magician,
I have no desire to swallow them, but in order that thou mayest know that my God hath power to make of no effect every kind of magic, (I will do so).'
Then the magician said,
Mighty is he who hath shewn might! Thou hast delivered (thy) soul from death, and made it to live once again.
For (it is with thee as it was with) Andrew, when he was broken on the cross, he was made new again.
And this is what happeneth unto those who have gone astray in their sins; when they wish (it) the Lord maketh them into new creatures again.'
And straightway the magician relinquished all the possessions which he had, and he was taught the Name of the Holy Trinity, and all his books which were full of magic he burned in the fire.
And the Duke said unto Apa Victor,
Be wise, and offer up sacrifice.'
And Apa Victor said unto him,
Indeed I am wise at all times.'
And the Duke said unto him, 'But this time thou art acting the fool.'
And Apa Victor said, 'The fools of the world are those whom God hath chosen to put to shame the wise.'
The Duke said unto him, 'Where is this writing found?'
And Apa Victor said, 'It is Paul who wrote it.'
And the Duke said, 'Is Paul then a god?'
And Apa Victor said unto him,
And the Duke was wroth, and he commanded (his servants) to tear out the intestines from his body down to his feet.
And Apa Victor spake before the Duke, saying
The tendons, nerves, and sinews which thou hast dragged out from my body are like unto the pointed instruments where- with (the physicians) probe a wound in order to liberate the fetid pus which is in it, and to give relief to the whole body.
That is the case with me at this moment.
And now I will give thanks unto my Lord Jesus the Christ, for ever and ever. Amen.'
And the Duke made (his servants) bring some oil, and they lighted a fire under it, and kept it burning until the oil was boiling.
And he made them pour it upon his necessary organs, and immediately the oil had been poured upon them they fell off on the ground.
And the blessed man Apa Victor answered and said,
This oil which thou hast poured upon me is like unto the cool water which a man is wont to drink during the hot w^eather, and in which he washeth himself so that he may feel the relief thereof from the heat in his whole body.'
And the Duke commanded (his servants) to hoist him up on the rack of torture, and to stretch him thereon, and he made them put six burning torches close to his body; and they racked him for a period of two hours.
And the Duke said unto him,
O wicked head! I weary myself.
I would spare thee from being put to shame, thou wilt not turn (i. e, repent).
Come now, offer up sacrifice.'
And Apa Victor said unto him,
Yesterday thou didst spare me; to-day spare thou me not.
Do whatsoever it pleaseth thee to do unto me.'
And the Duke commanded (his servants) to pour vinegar and ashes into his mouth.
And Apa Victor said,
'This vinegar and these ashes, which thou makest me to drink, are like unto honey dropped down my throat.'
Then the Duke commanded his servants to dig out his two eyes whilst he was alive.
And straightway the executioners came and thrust red-hot knives into his eyes and ears
and forthwith his two eyeballs were ripped out and fell upon the ground. And a smoke (i. e. dizziness) mounted up in his brain.
And Apa Victor said unto the Duke,
Even if thou hast the power and dost make blind the eyes of my body, I have still left within me other eyes,
that is to say, those of the mind and understanding, which will give me light, according to that which Peter the Apostle said
 If it be that ye see with the eyes of the body, ye shall see the works of the world, which are vain, that is to say, fornication, and slandering, and murder, and calumny, and pride, because of which things the wrath of God cometh.'
Therefore I have no need of the eyes of my body.
And the Duke answered and said unto him,
'If thou wilt compel me now to inflict further severe tortures upon thee, (I must do so).'
And Apa Victor said unto him,
Inflict upon me any punishment thou wishest to inflict
for I am prepared to bear up under it. only take care to spare me not.'
Then the Duke commanded (his servants) to hang him up on a pillar head downwards
And Apa Victor said unto the Duke,
Even though thou strippest off me my skin which is outside me, I have still another skin, which is inside me, and which neither thy power nor thy tortures can injure.
And again, though thou shalt cut out my tongue, God is wont to perform judgement (on behalf of) those whose mouths are silenced.
Now, therefore, I care nothing for thy tortures.'
And whilst the blessed man Apa Victor was saying these things, behold, a certain young woman whose name was Stephanou, who was the wife of a soldier,
looked out through her window — now she was about fifteen years of age — and cried out, saying,
Blessed art thou, O Apa Victor, and blessed art thou in all thy works.
All thy sacrifices have been received from thy hands, even as were received the sacrifices of Abel, the righteous man, which he brought unto God in integrity of heart.
God shall shew compassion upon thee as He did upon Enoch, the scribe of righteousness.
Thou art perfect and righteous in thy generation as was Noah.'
Thou dost lay thy body on the altar as a sacrifice, as did Isaac.
Thou dost manifest patient endurance, as did Jacob at the time when Esau pursued him (when he was) going to Laban.
Thou art a man of wisdom and understanding, as was Daniel the Prophet.
Thou hast been instructed in divine things by thy dreams like Joseph.
Thou hast manifested patient endurance like Job, the man of God.
The Enemy hath been envious of thee as he was of Isaiah the Prophet, whose body they sawed in twain lengthwise with a wood saw. And the fire hath not touched thee, even as the fire of Nebuchadnezzar touched not the Three Holy (Children).
Thou hast given thy heart unto God, even as did David, the son of Jesse.
Behold, I swear by thy salvation, Apa Victor, that two crowns shall be sent down from heaven being borne by twenty-four angels
one of these is for thee, and the other shall be for me. Though like thee I am a vessel of infirmity, I shall have an inheritance among the mighty ones.
And when the Duke heard this woman proclaiming these things, he commanded his soldiers to bring her unto him.
And when they had brought her, the Duke said unto her,
How many years old art thou that thou dost dare to proclaim these violent words in such an impudent manner?
And she said unto him,
I am fifteen years and eight months old.
And the Duke said unto her,
How many years is it since thou didst marry (thy) husband?
And she said unto him,
Behold, one year and six months.'
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
MAY HIS HOLY BLESSING COME UPON US, AND MAY WE BE SAVED! AMEN.
And it came to pass in the time of Apa Pambo, the elder of the church of Shiet, after he had protected the body of the blessed woman Hillaria, the daughter of the Emperor Zeno,
A vision was shewn to him, [and a voice said unto him,] 'Rise up, and go thou into the district which is on the sea-coast,
and thou shalt enquire for the anchorite, of whose sandals there is not in the whole world anyone who is worthy to unloose the latchets.'
And the blessed Apa Pambo rose up and went into the desert in the strength of God which was with him, even as it was with the blessed Antonius at the time when he was on his journey to go to the blessed man Apa Paulus a second time.
And Apa Pambo answered, saying, 'Hail thou, Apa Hierax, who hast become a companion of the angels of God by reason of thy purity.'
And Apa Hierax opened the door, and brought in Apa Pambo, and they sat down together.
And Apa Pambo said unto him, 'My beloved brother Apa Hierax, behold, is it very many years since thou didst come to this place?'
And Apa Hierax said unto Pambo, 'Behold, I have been in this place eighteen years, and I have never eaten any of the foods which are usually eaten in this world, but I have lived upon the fruit of trees.'
Now there was a palm-tree growing outside that cell, and it produced twelve clusters, one cluster each month,
and he lived upon the fruit thereof.
And I, Pambo, said unto him, 'My beloved father, are there any brethren living beyond thee in the desert?'
And Apa Hierax said, 'There are some;
bless me, and get thee gone to them, and receive a blessing at their hands.
And having departed from him into the mountain I came to a small cell of a monk,
and I called into it according to the rule of the monkish brethren.
And as I stood outside it, the brother made answer unto me from the inside, saying, 'Hail, Apa Pambo, the elder of the church of Shiet, thou mighty ship that sailest over the desert that is without water,
And when we had saluted each other, we offered up prayer, and we sat down.
And I said unto him, ' My father, I know that thou must be cold in winter, and thou wilt not be burnt up with the heat in the summer, when wearing a tunic of this kind.'
And Apa Pamoun said unto me, because this, most certainly, is its name, O my beloved brother Apa Pambo.
Believe me, O my beloved father, behold, it is twenty years ago since I came to this place, and with this single garment I have found means to keep myself warm during the winter, and to moderate the heat of the atmosphere in summer time.
And I confess unto thee that this tunic will suffice for me until the day of my death;
and, moreover, when I am dead it will be large enough for them to roll me up in it until the day of the Judgement of Truth.'
And I said unto him, 'My beloved father, is there any brother living beyond thee in the desert?'
And he said unto me, 'There is one brother the latchet of one of whose sandals all the whole world is not worthy to unloose.
I myself went to him many times, wishing to visit him,
and he used to answer me from the inside of his cell, saying, 'Get thee gone! In coming hither thou hast given thyself trouble [to no purpose].
No man of flesh shall see my face, except the elder of the church of Shiet.'
And I said unto him, 'Nay, it is not ordained thus, and it is not for this purpose that I have come to this place.
But I will remember thee if the Lord maketh straight my way so that I may meet that brother.
And, my father, do thou remember me until I shall enjoy the blessing of that brother.'
And when I had journeyed into the mountain about the distance of a mile — now I, Pambo, the least of men, swear unto thee by the awful throne of God, and I do not lie in what I am going to say — the being who seized the prophet Habakkuk in ancient days, and carried him, and the food which was in his hands, and brought him to the pit of the lions [when] Habakkuk gave it (i.e. the food) to Daniel who was in the pit of the lions,
this same being, I say, seized me under the impulse of the Spirit, and brought me to the little habitation of that brother.
And I knocked at the door, according to the rule of the monkish brethren, and I stood still at the door for a long time.
And after these things the brother answered me from within, saying, 'Hail, Apa Pambo, thou elder of the church of Shiet, thou mighty ship that sailest over the desert that is without water.
Then I remembered the patriarch Jacob, and how he, when he fled from the face of Esau his brother, went into Mesopotamia of Syria, and how when he had arrived at the place wherein were the sheep of Laban
he went up to the well, and rolled away the stone which was on the mouth thereof, without any man giving him assistance, and how he watered the sheep of Laban and then sent them away to feed.
And finally I understood that in everything that the saints perform it is God Who helpeth them.
And I said unto him, 'O my holy father, shew me thy holy name, for God hath hidden this from me.'
And he said, 'Cyrus is my name.
I am the brother of the Emperor Theodosius, and I was reared and fed at the same table as Arcadius and Honorius. And, indeed, many, many times hath Honorius said unto me, 'Take me with thee into the desert, and I will become a monk';
but I did not wish to take him with me, because he is a son of the Emperor.
And when we saw that oppression (or, violence) had multiplied, and that the Emperors were committing' sin, and that the rulers were robbing the poor, and that everyone was turning out of the straight road, and making corrupt his path before God, I rose up, and I set out and I came to this desert, and I took up my abode therein because of the multitude of my sins.
May God forgive me these!'
And I, Pambo, said unto him, 'My beloved father, where a wilt thou find men in this desert place to comfort thee in thy sufferings?'
And Apa Cyrus said unto me, 'Believe me, my beloved brother, Apa Pambo, my God and my Lord Jesus Christ are Those Who visit me in this desert wherein I live.
For I have never seen a man who came to me except a certain brother who was a monk, and who came hither wishing to see my face, besides such a one I have never seen anyone.
Now, therefore, may God bless thee because of the refreshing (or, rest) which thou hast given unto me during the little time which I have been with thee; and may my soul rest with thee for ever!
And now I am going to a strange country, and into a city that is not mine, wherein I shall beg from one person after another, and wherein I shall be a helpless and a most miserable stranger.
Verily, O my mother I am become an orphan, fatherless and motherless.
If at this present time a man goes away on a journey into a far country, whether in connection with trafficking- or whether for some other purpose
when he cometh back after a long time to his house he will find his servants and his parents and his kinsfolk alive; and if he hath suffered tribulation in the strange land he will forget his sufferings, because he will find all his people safe and sound.
On the other hand, wretched and miserable is that man who, when he goeth on a journey into a strange country, must abide in exile until he die,
and indeed, such is my own case this day. I am going to make myself a stranger unto thee, and unto all the people of my house.
Swear by thy salvation, O my mother, that thou wilt not neglect to enquire after my body.
If I die, be not forgetful of my youth.
Remember, O my mother, that I passed nine months in thy womb before thou didst bring me forth, and that I drank at thy breasts for three years
Then straightway his mother and his slaves wept (for him), for he was a kind-hearted man, and would hearken unto the man of no account as well as unto the noble.
And his mother said
Look at me, O my son Victor.
What hath happened to thee?
Could not the Emperor have sentenced thee to pay a fine of gold or silver
rather than have made thee endure these things and banishment to a remote city?
Explain to me why it is that thou art in this disgraceful state.
Explain to me so that I may sacrifice my own soul (or, life) to save thee.
Is not thy father present in the Palace that the Emperor hath done these things unto thee?
And Apa Victor said unto his mother
All these things have happened unto me because of my father, but God shall, in truth, forgive him, O my mother.
Had it not been for the Emperor my father would have cut off my head.
A stranger hath had compassion upon me
and my father hath not had compassion upon me this year.
O my mother, if my father shall do evil (?) shall he not die ?
Diocletian shall become blind before he dieth, he shall receive alms at the g-ate of the city of Antioch, and his seed shall perish quickly, because he hath persecuted the Name of the Lord Jesus.
 Woe be unto every one who shall hearken unto him, for their habitation shall be the pit of the abyss for ever, and their father is the Devil.
And his mother said unto Apa Victor
Dost thou not know that in the coming month I am going to take thy bride for thee?
And Apa Victor said unto his mother
O my mother, what use is it for thee to bring me a bride, and to put riches of every kind into my hands?
For it is written
The world shall pass away and the desirable things thereof, but he who shall do the will of God shall abide for ever.
Now therefore, O my mother, do thou the will of God, so that thou mayest live for ever.
For gold and silver rust, (fine) raiment becometh moth-eaten and falleth into holes,- a man dieth and he turneth into corruption in the tomb, and the remembrance of him perisheth on the earth; but the righteous man shall never be moved.
O my mother, say not in thy heart that possessions are of value, for they have no value with God, Who can make the poor man into a rich man, and the rich man into a poor man before the sun shall set this day.
After these things he set out and departed, and he took off the ring which was on his finger, and gave it to his mother, and he prayed to God in the following words, saying
Jesus, my Lord, Who sittest upon the chariot of the Cherubim and Seraphim,' (Whom theca angels) stand before. Whom the denizens of the heavens call  'Sabaoth,' ' Whom the peoples  on the earth ll Jesus the Christ ', Whom the nations call 'the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit', keep Thou  me without movement (i. e. steadfast), and without, trepidation.
Lead Thou me not into temptation, for I am not capable of hearing up against it, but deliver me from the Evil One. For unto Thee belong the power and the glory for ever. Amen.
O my Lord, be Thou with me in every place wherein they shall take me for I know not whither they will carry me.
After these words he blessed all his household and saluted (i. e. kissed) them.
And he sealed the door of his bedroom in the Name of thee Christ Jesus, and come out, and said
O my house and my servants, truly I am departing from you, and I am departing from thee, O my mother; never again after this moment shall I return to gaze upon you.
Remember, O my servants, that I have never neglected (?) any one of you, or (any) stranger.
I am not like unto other young men who are uninstructed, and I have never spoken a word out of place, but I have paid to the humble man the respect that was due to his humble estate, and to the noble the honour that was due to his exalted degree.
Verily, O my mother, with the very same treatment which I have meted out to the general and the eparoh, have I treated the man who was poor and him who was wretched, and I have paid honour unto them as unto God
I have never for a single day manifested any sign of haughtiness and pride, for I knew that each and every one of us must die.
And after these things Apa Victor came out and joined himself unto the soldiers
and they put the gag in his mouth
and they seized him, and dragged him along
and placed him in a boat; and when they had arrived at Rakote, they transferred him to the prison
and they delivered the letter (of the Emperor) to Armenins, Count of Rakote.
And at the third hour of the twentieth day of Pharmoute, the soldiers took the letter and had it read to the Duke, according to that which Diocletian had written therein.
THE SECOND MARTYRDOM OF SAINT APA VICTOR THEGENERAL.
IN THE PEACE OF GOD. MAY HIS HOLY BLESSING COME UPON US, AND MAY WE ALL RE SAVED. AMEN.
And the Duke was in the praetorium passing sentences of judgement upon the soldiers for the sake of the Name of the Christ
and he commanded that Apa Victor should be guarded in prison until the following day.
And on the morrow, when the Count was seated on the judgement throne, in the midst of the market-place of Rakote,
he gave orders, saying
Bring to me this Profane man Apa Victor, who hath been banished hither, and concerning whom the Emperors letter hath already been read to me.
And when they had brought Victor before the Count, he said unto him
Wilt thou not read the letter which concerneth my patient endurance again?
(If thou wilt) thou wilt find stated in it that I have been banished to this Place for the sake of this Name (of Christ, for they) said, 'Offer sacrifice (to Apollo)'; because I will not offer up sacrifice (I have been brought here)
The Duke said unto him
O bad head! Wouldst thou make a mock of me?
By the health of Apollo, this is thy punishment: we are to destroy thy body by fire. Knowest thou not that it is the emperor who hath commanded me what I am to do unto thee?
He hath commanded me to cast thee into the furnace of the baths
but I would shew mercy unto thee for the sake of thy father
And Apa Victor spake unto the Duke, saying
Yesterday thou didst disgrace my father ; do not disgrace him to-day. And moreover, (in spite of what) thou sayest
I will make bold and will speak in thy presence, according to this world.
In times past, before I was delivered over unto thee, I received rations and money (from the emperor)
Thou didst make supplication to my father, saying
Make me Count of Rakote.
And my father did not consider thee of sufficient honour for the position, and would not discuss the matter with thee. Then thou didst make entreaty to me secretly, and didst say
Speak to thy father on my behalf. Let him take from me three centenarii of gold, and give me the office of Count.
And I took thee into my house, and I made all my slaves to wait upon thee, and they received gifts of gold armlets (from thee). And after these things my father came in
and I threw myself on my knees before him on the ground, and I remained there until he was persuaded by me, and he made thee a Count.
And yet thou didst not keep in mind any one of these things for which thou canst now repay me. But it is written in the Gospel
He who did eat of my bread with me hath lifted up his heel against me.'
And the Duke made (his men) to inflict gashes in the face of Apa Victor, and he made them to stretch him out with thongs (of leather)
and they gave unto him fourteen stripes with the triple flogging whips, saying
I will torture thee until thou diest, according to the orders of the Emperor.
Afterwards the Duke made his man to drive iron nails into his hands and feet
and he covered (?) his whole body with iron, from his head to his feet
and he cast him into prison, where they abandoned him to hunger and thirst until the following day.
And when the morning was come the Count made them bring Apa Victor unto him, and when he bad been brought into his presence every part of him was loaded with iron (fetters).
 And the blessed man Apa Victor was not able to walk because of the weight of the iron which had been placed on his body
and the soldiers supplied twelve (men and) they carried him.
And the angels shall rejoice over thee, and Jesus shall exult upon His throne, and all the saints shall be glad with thee
This matter hath, however, taken place through the dispensation of God.
and now, behold, God hath fulfilled for me my wish this day.'
And I said unto him, 'My brother, is there any other brother beyond thee in the desert?'
There is nothing beyond me except darkness and the punishments which sinners are enduring.
 Sit thou down in this place, O my brother, in this hour, and thou shalt see mighty wonders.'
And when the light of the Lord's Day had spread abroad
I heard voices crying out, ' Thy love is accepted, O Christ; Thou hast shewn mercy unto us.'
And I said unto him, ' My beloved father, what shall we do in respect of these things?
The mountain is crumbling away under us.'
And he said unto me, ' Be not afraid, O my son, that God will come down for the sake of punishments.
He hath commanded the angels who inflict punishments upon souls to give them a respite, for to-day is the Lord's Day, and [the day of] the Resurrection of the Lord.'
And he also said unto me, ' Peradventure the Christ will come into this place to-day according to His wont, and I shall be able to kiss Him, mouth to mouth.'
And whilst he was saying these things, behold, the Christ opened the door of the habitation, and He came in; now the a door opened straightway of its own accord.
And when He had come in, believe me, O my brethren and fathers, I, Pambo, the least of men, saw the Christ go up to that brother and kiss him, mouth to mouth, even as doth a brother who hath arrived from a strange region when he meeteth his friend.
And as for me, Pambo, the least of men, I was not worthy that He should kiss me then, and He went forth from our midst and we did not know whither He had gone.
If this be so shew me now who this brother monk was Who came in and kissed thee, I myself being unworthy that He should kiss me.'
And he said unto me, 'Didst thou not know who He was?'
And I said unto him, 'No, my father, I did not. How should I know who He was?'
And he said unto me, 'This was the Lord of the thing's that are in heaven, and of the things that are upon the earth.
This was the Son of Mary, the Holy Virgin.
This was He Who filleth the desert, and every one who calleth upon Him.'
And he also said unto me, 'A great prophet and Archimandrite hath died this day, that is to say, Apa Shenoute the elder
Ⲧhe whole world is punished this day, for he was a very great teacher, and this day is the seventh of the month Epeph.'
And he also said unto me, 'This is the man who did not lie down on his bed, nor slumber, nor sleep until he found the place of the Lord, the habitation of the God of Jacob, his Helper.
Inasmuch as he fought splendidly he conquered the Devil in [this] world and hath departed to his Lord, and he shall be perfect in the kingdom which is in the heavens.
May his blessing and his prayer be with us! Amen.'
And he also said unto me, ‘My beloved brother Pambo, I am sick this day. I beseech thee to do me the favour of praying for me until I journey over the road of fear and terror.'
And I said unto him, 'My beloved father, art thou, even thou, afraid, notwithstanding all the multitude of ascetic labours which thou hast performed in this world?'
He said unto me, 'I have performed a few of the ascetic labours which God appointed for me, it is true, but how is it possible for us not to be afraid of the things which have been indicated to us by very many witnesses, that is to say, the river of fire, and the appearance before the Judge?
And it came to pass that at the third hour of the eighth day of the month Epeph he became very ill indeed, and he said unto me, 'I salute thee in the Lord, O my beloved brother.'
and he said unto me, 'I salute thee in the Lord, O my beloved brother.' And thus saying he prayed, and he recited the prayer in the Gospel, and he opened his mouth, and yielded up his spirit, like one who lieth asleep.
And I sat down, and I wept continuously over him. And as I was weeping over him, behold, the Christ opened the door of the cell, and He came in, and He stood up by the body of the blessed Apa Cyrus, and He wept over him and I wept over him.
And I saw the tears of the Christ which fell upon the body of the blessed Apa Cyrus; and the Christ turned away and departed by the door of the abode.
And when He had gone out I saw a multitude of Angels, and Archangels, and Apostles, and all the righteous, standing there.
And one of them came towards me ; now he was lame
and he said unto me, ' Knowest thou who I am?'
And I said unto him, ' Nay, my lord, I do not.' He said unto me, ' Hearken, [and] I will shew thee.
I am Kepha, unto whom they gave the name of Peter.
I am he whom the Christ called in the Gospel 'Bar lona,' that is to say, 'Son of the dove.'
The blessed Apa Shenoute went to his rest yesterday.
He, i.e. Christ, hath taken the soul of the blessed man Apa Cyrus, and [the soul of] Apa Shenoute, the Archimandrite, to the place of rest, even as it is written, 'There are many mansions in the house of My Father.'
And after these things, whilst I was pondering in my heart and trying to think what I should do with the body of the blessed man, and whether I should bury it, and where I should lay it, the Saviour came forth from the door of the cell, and closed the door behind Him.
And the Saviour had His hand upon the door of the cell
and He was dragging the body of the blessed man
and He became unto him a place of defence until the day of the Righteous Judgement.
And the Saviour went up into heaven with His angels.
And I walked and came forth to the brethren Apa Pamoun and Apa Hierax, and I told them of the things which I had seen, and they glorified God.
And I remained with them for a few days.
After these things I departed to my monastery in Shiet, and I wrote the life of the blessed man Apa Cyrus
and I placed it in the church of Shiet, for the profit and consolation of those who should hear it [read], and to the glory of the Holy Trinity, the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit, for ever and ever! Amen.
And the duke answered,
And he said to her, 'Offer up sacrifice now, O Stephanou,'
and do not die an evil death.
And she said unto him, 'My name is indeed Stephanou, the interpretation of which is 'crown incorruptible,'
and therefore I will not offer up sacrifice, because I wish to receive the crown which is (indicated by) my name.
Then the duke was exceedingly wroth,
and he commanded his soldiers to set her between two palm-trees, and to tie her to each of them.
And they pulled the trunks of the two palms close to her holy body by means of a rope, and tied them together.
And afterwards the two palms were released suddenly by cutting the rope, and in this way she was rent asunder down to the middle of her body, and she became two pieces.
Thus she fulfilled her martyrdom in peace,
and she departed into the heavens, unto Him whom she had loved, the Christ, in great glory, amen.
Then the Duke passed the sentence of death upon Apa Victor, [and ordered his soldiers to] cut off his head.
And the blessed man Apa Victor answered and said unto him, 'I give thanks unto my Lord Jesus the Christ, Who hath given unto me these riches forever.
Now, therefore, hearken unto me, and I will declare unto you the following things which have been revealed to me.
Now after I am dead ye yourselves shall also die, at the end of my eleventh [year].
'And as concerning the Duke Sebastianos, an ekstasis shall take place, and certain men in a town shall delay [in paying tribute], and he shall embark in his boat and depart to despoil them,
and as (the crew) are tying the boat up to the bank, the Duke shall come forth.
And as he is coming down from the boat by the landing plank he shall trip up, and the monobolis shall penetrate his foot, and the foot shall mortify, and he shall die in the twenty-fourth year after my death.
And again, all the wise men and all the orators shall go and eat their midday meal together at the end of the eighth year after my death, and the house wherein they are shall fall upon them, and they shall all die together.
And Apa Victor said unto the executioner, 'Dismiss me speedily, for the sake of the angels who have hold upon me.'
Now the executioner was not pleased to do so, for he only struck his neck with the sword,
And his head hung by the skin of his neck.
And Apa Victor was in torture, and his spirit was sorely distressed in him.
And he looked up and saw Horian the Kourson,
and he said unto him, 'Take the sword out of the hand of this lawless man, and do thou make an end of me, for this wicked man of Sioout hath already done very many evil thinks to me during my lifetime, and now also at my death he doth grievously afflict my spirit.
May the Lord reward him according to what he hath done unto me.'
And Horion placed his napkin before his face.
And (Apa Victor) said unto him, 'O my beloved brother, I entreat thee most earnestly,'
and (Horion) girded on the sword.
And the camp was shaken three times.
Then he cut off his head.
He consummated his martyrdom.
And Horion lifted up his eyes to heaven.
and he saw the soul of Apa Victor, which Ausouel carried (to heaven) in a napkin made of byssus,
and the saints saluted the soul of Apa Victor.
And when they had taken off the head of Apa Victor blood mingled with milk came forth.
And he consummated his glorious martyrdom on the twenty-seventh day of the month Parmoute, at the tenth hour of the day.
And all the words which he spake before they took off his head came true.
Peace be upon every one who hath suffered martyrdom for the Name of our Lord Jesus the Christ, to Whom be the glory, and to His Good Farther, and to the Holy Spirit, life-giving and consubstantial, now and always, forever and ever, amen.
Agree thou therefore with him that goeth to law with thee whilst he is with thee in the way;
for when the way hath come to an end, thou wilt no longer find another opportunity for repentance.
Watch thou then carefully lest he that goeth to law with thee give thee over into the hand of the Judge, and the Judge give thee over into the hand of the attendant, that is to say, the merciless powers which are over the punishments, and they cast thee into prison, that is to say, the outer darkness, until thou pay the uttermost kontrantes
Moreover, they shall judge thee not only for thy deeds, but also for thy thoughts and for thy motives.
Since, therefore, we know all these things, let us help ourselves.
When we shall have actual expei'ience of the punishments, then we shall know that bitter is pleasure, and then we shall have good reason for knowing how bitter that bitterness can be.
Now therefore, since these things take place in this wise, O my beloved, let us make our appeal to the Merciful God not to deliver us over into the hands of the demons.
and it is they who shall be our accusers in the Day of Judgement.
Let us, then, be afraid in our hearts of that day, and of that hour wherein our own power of reasoning shall be our sternest judge, and of that moment wherein we shall see them (i. e., our sins) all standing before us, clearly depicted in our sight, as if they were actual images,
(Now) we ourselves love a certain man for (one) of three things ; either because of his goodness, or because he loveth us ourselves, or because of his beauty.
But what other kind of beauty is there which can be compared with that which belongeth to our God?
even as David spake saying, 'He is fairer in His beauty than the children of men'
Moreover, who is there who hath loved us as our God and Father hath loved us?
Consider now the blessed man David and how great was the | desire which he had to see God, for he said, 'When shall I come and appear before the face of my God?
He did not wish to wait until the appointed time in his life, but he burned with desire to come forth from this place (or, world), and to see Him Whom he loved.
Such desire or such readiness appertained to the soul of the philosopher, which took to itself wings and flew up into the sky.
Moreover, thou thyself shalt love this (God) only, and thou shalt pass by all the works (or, affairs) of this life as if they were shadows.
Keep thou in remembrance at all times the life which shall be for ever,
and the kingdom which shall endure, and the existence with the choirs of angels, and the imperishable glory, and the living of the life with Christ, wherein there shall be no sorrow of heart whatsoever, for the Scripture saith, 'Sorrow of heart, and grief, and sighing, shall flee away.'
And continue to remember this life wherein there is nothing but grief, and weeping, and sadness of heart, and contumely, and carelessness, and sin, and suffering , and old age, and death.
and he earnestly desired to escape from all these (troubles).
And he said, ' When shall I come and appear before the face of my God?'
, so that thou thyself mayest hear (the words), 'Enter into the' joy of our God.'
It is right therefore for us to keep watch, and to pray at all times.
Similarly also the husbandman is accustomed to keep watch throughout the night, so that no person may destroy his vineyard, and the shepherd also keepeth watch all night guarding his flocks of sheep,
Even as the Patriarch Jacob spake saying, 'I was consumed by the fiery heat in the daytime, and by the cold of the night, and sleep departed from my eyes.'
And for what reason did he pass such long nights of vigil ? He did so because he said, f Peradventure some wild beast will destroy one of the sheep/
and it is the soul which they will place before the Awful Throne, and make to defend itself for all that it hath done.
for it is unlikely that we shall be able to repent in that place (i. e., in the world to come).
For this same reason we shall be condemned to come forth from the body (which shall) be hidden from us, in order that we may be in terror at all times.
And consider the blessed man Jacob who, having set a stone under his head, slept and saw a ladder upon the earth, the top whereof reached up into the sky;
and the angels of God were ascending and descending on it,
and they were bearing our prayers up to God, and bringing to us blessings from His hand.
If they have joy concerning us when we repent, in like manner they must be sorrowful in heart concerning our carelessness.
For at all times our conscience accuseth us, and chideth us for what we have done, more especially when we speak concerning the judgement which is to come ;
Would that that rich man had been rebuked (on earth), for then his tongue would not have been consumed in the fire which cannot be extinguished!
And if thou shalt say when thou prayest, ' Keep me, O God, as the apple of (Thine) eye,' He Himself shall say unto thee, 'Keep thou My words and My commandments as the apple of (thine) eye
And, O beloved, now that thou hast set thy hand to the plough, do not turn back, and thou shalt not become like a pillar of salt.
Let neither anger have dominion over thee, nor grief, nor any feeling of passion whatsoever; and utter not vain words without consideration.
and thy speech shall be according to the Law of God.
Set thou the Giver of the Law before thine eyes at all times, and let Him continue to abide with thee, and let Him be unto thee a counsellor.
Let him fare delicately in his eatings and feastings, but do thou (nourish) thyself on the words of God.
 but also that thou mayest have rule over pride and wrath.
and take heed that thou dost not make thy conscience to pass sentence upon thee before the condemnation (or, judgement).
Remember thou that of necessity all our works shall be made manifest.
No man desireth that even one person shall see us in this world if we are to be put to shame;
and 'the righteous man declareth the faith which is manifest
Remember thou at all times the good confession of Christ which hath entered into thy heart. Remember thou the last day. Make thou thyself secure on every side, especially in the matter of thy tongue,
for the Scripture saith, ' The tongue is that which polluteth the whole body '; when the body is polluted it is a necessity that the heart also should be corrupt therewith.
Therefore well hath Paul said, Men whose hearts are evil and ' evil words corrupt the hearts which are good
Seek thou after Paul, even as did the blessed woman Thekla, so that thou mayest hear the words of Paul.
Let thine eyes look downwards upon the ground, but let thy heart be in the height of the heavens.
Thou hast need of great soberness (or, caution), for thine Adversary standeth against thee, and he is wary.
He was cast forth from the Paradise which was upon the earth, and he seeth thee now (as) thou enterest into heaven, and is not unmindful of it.
Hearken unto the word of him that saith, 'I wish that ye may be without care.'
Let there be no care whatsoever to thee about anything, except only that which concerneth the kingdom which is in the heavens.
If thou wishest to enter into heaven with the body, from the earth, subdue thou the flesh by means of fasting, and then thou shalt be able to make it to enter into the height with ease.
Lift up thine eyes to the heavens, wherein is He Whom thou lovest, and thou shalt overcome passion by means of the love which is holy.
Prayer and faith shall help thee, and the Holy Scriptures shall give thee instruction, and thou shalt have from this world, according to (His) pledge to us, the rest which is in the heavens.
Abide not with a woman who shall make thee to offend, have no care for a child, and avoid thou the care which appertaineth to the rearing of a child.
Follow thou after thy God Who shall be the guide of thy heart into the kingdom which is in the heavens.
Follow thou after Him Who saith unto thee, ' If ye shall come to l Me in rectitude, I Myself will come to you in rectitude.
If thou wishest to be like unto Christ, follow thou in His footsteps ;
narrow is the gate and difficult, and it is (only) the righteous who enter in through it.
Hearken unto the blessed man Daniel, who saith, ' I Daniel was in sore grief for three weeks.
And John who dwelt in the desert did not cultivate a vineyard for himself, in order that he might not make himself to be a being attached to the earth.
Let these be unto thee (examples) which have been prepared to instruct thee.
Thou shalt choose for thyself the citizenship which appertaineth. to heaven.
Fight thou the good fight of faith,6 and look eagerly beyond it to thy crown of righteousness,
and let thy career be strenuous.
It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the Living God
 Hast thou not observed the statues of the emperors, and noticed that some of them are large and beautifully adorned,
whilst others have become black through (the lapse of) time, and have decayed, and have become objects of derision?
Thus shall all our works appear in that other world which is to come, even as the statues.
Let us flee from that shame which shall be for ever,
For He hath no need whatsoever of anything that belongeth to us, except only the salvation of our souls.
for He spake saying, 'He that shall endure patiently to the end shall be saved'
And again (the Book saith), He hath suffered for ever, he shall live to the I end.'
let us run wisely so that we may obtain, even as it is written.
and calmness of mind and body, and temperance in eating, and the continence which is effective, and the love of strenuous toil, and sympathy, and brotherly love, and the sharing of our possessions with our neighbours, and the faith which is perfect.
Now these are only a very few (of the qualities) of which we may make mention in this case, and they need great striving to make them to flourish.
It doth not say that it is like unto the sun, or the moon, or the beautiful hosts of the stars, or the gold which is incorruptible, or the beauty which fadeth away, or even the sky itself.
Observe the exalted reputation of purity, for it entereth into everything.
Therefore what is seemly for us to do is to pray, so that those who are strong among the virgins may remain permanent in their healthy state,
and that those who are sick, who have actually fallen into sin, may receive healing.
Now it is seemly that we ourselves should weep in such a manner that we may wash out our eyes which have been seeing badly ;
thou seest the wound, and thou knowest what will heal it.
Fortify thou the windows of thy soul, and not only thine ears, and thine eyes, and thy mouth,
for these are the entrances through which the Evil One is wont to come in, even as it is written, 'Death hath entered in through your windows'
Let the commandments of holiness be upon thine eyes, and upon thine ears.
Let the Psalms be in thy mouth, and meditation on the Scriptures [in thy heart].
Therefore it is seemly for us to open our windows, that is to say, our senses (or, feelings) to God, and to shut them fast against the Adversary.
Take thou, however, good heed unto thyself, lest there be thorns in the palm tree, that is to say, admonishings, when thou art driven to follow after sin,
for the Book saith, ' The words of the wise are as ox-goads, and as the nails which are sharp '—so that whilst these remain fixed in thy heart thou shalt abstain from every sin.
Now the Book saith, ' Lay hold upon the height thereof/ in order that thou mayest be above the sky, and be able to bear the temptations which shall come upon thee.
From time to time, and at all times, rehearse the Holy | Scriptures,
for as the wine which men drink assuageth grief, and changeth the sadness of the heart into joy, even so doth the spiritual wine which is distributed throughout the Scriptures make the soul which hath partaken thereof to rejoice.
Let the remembrance of God be in thy heart at all times, and thou thyself shalt say with David, I see God face to face at all times ; He is on (my) right hand, therefore shall I never be moved
Let these words be written on thy hands, and fixed firmly before thine eyes.
If thou wilt ascribe glory to God by reason of His commandments, He shall be on thy right hand;
if thou treat Him with contempt through thy transgressions, the Devil shall be on thy right hand.
For thus doth the Scripture bear witness concerning Judas who made himself to be an assistant (of the Devil): ' Let the Devil stand on his right hand'
Ascribe thou glory unto God at all times, and say, I will exalt Thee, O my God and King'';
thou shalt glorify Him through thy works, and not through thy words only.
In this wise did David ascribe glory to God, and he said, ' I will bless Thee for ever, and for ever and ever (He did not glorify Him) for a day, neither for a month, nor for a year, but throughout his life,
for he well knew that if a man made perfect his glorification of God he would be only beginning.
But thou wilt say often, ' What manner of heart is it that is able to ascribe glory to God at all times?
And again, it is even as David spake saying, ' Cleanse me, O God, from my secret (sins)
And our heart must be like unto that which the Saviour commanded us to make for ourselves saying, Blessed are those who are pure in their hearts, for they shall see God
Thus is it with the man who committeth no sin against God,
he shall not fall into despair, but he shall say with Paul, ' Who shall separate us from the love of God ?' and the words which follow these.
and that moment when we shall take our stand before the Holy Throne, and shall have to defend every deed which we have done in this world, and when all the sins which we have committed shall be made to appear before the eyes of every one,
Then shall all the works which we have done be laid bare, those which we have done openly, and those which we have done in secret, and the things which have been done in the night season, and those which have been done in the daytime, and those which we have done inadvertently, and the faults of forgetfulness
and those which we have done with the members in the body, and those which we have performed at the dictates of our hearts ;
and in that hour everything which we have done during our whole lives, and every sin which we committed in secret, shall be revealed.
Remember that it is necessary for us to transfer ourselves from this world, and that we must appear before the Judge Whom it is impossible to deceive,
Who shall reveal the things which are hidden in the darkness, Who shall make manifest the counsels of hearts, and Who shall try our works, and our l thoughts, and our words.
In (that) hour we shall receive a great punishment for the sins which we have committed, and which we imagined were few.
Keep thou in thy remembrance at every hour the flame of Gehenna which cannot be quenched, and forget it not.
And set thou at all times before thine eyes the Judge, Who shall come to judge those who are living and those who are dead.
Think, moreover, of the thousands of thousands, and the tens of thousands of tens of thousands, of angels who stand before the Judge at all times.
Let thine ears hear beforehand the sound of the trumpets, and the awful voice of that Judge,
and let thine eyes see beforehand the things which are ordained to take place.
Now there shall be some whom they will cast forth into the outer darkness,
and there are others who even after the fight, and the suffering, which (they have endured for the sake of) virginity, shall have the door of the bridal chamber, which is in the heavens, shut against them.
Look at certain of them, and observe how they are tied up in bundles, like garden waste, and cast into the furnace of fire.
On one they pass the sentence of condemnation because he laughed the laugh of the scoffer, and out of season
and on another because he offended his brother, or because he Fol. 48 b col. 1 behaved | unjustly towards his neighbour;
To another they assign retribution because of the idle words which he spake.
On another they pass sentence of doom because of his evil mind.
In the face (or, mouth) of another the door of the kingdom is shut because of the words of infamy which he hath spoken.
Another they deliver over to derision and shame for ever.
And others who have shewn themselves to be entirely destitute of the understanding of God shall hear (spoken the words), 'I know you not; whence are ye?
because they did in the course of their works things which were an abomination to Christ.
Let us cry out to the mercy of God, so long as we are in this habitation,
for the Scripture saith, 'Who shall give thanks unto Thee in Amente?'
Moreover, let us consider this, O beloved. God hath made for us all the members of our material body double,
for He hath bestowed upon us two eyes, two ears, two hands, and two feet.
If it should happen that one of these (pairs) becometh disabled through sickness, we are able to relieve our wants by (using) the other.
The soul, however, which hath been made for us is one only, and if we destroy it through carelessness, by what manner of means shall we live?
Let us take exceedingly great care that we do not permit anything whatsoever to become of more importance than the health of the soul, for it is the soul which will be set up to be judged, and it is the soul which will have to defend (the body) before that Throne.
If thou shalt say at that time to the Judge, ' The possessions of this world outwitted me'
He 'Who judgeth shall make answer unto thee saying, Didst thou then not hear Me when I cried out to thee, In what shall a man be benefited if he gain the whole world and suffer the loss of his soul?'
Or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?
And He shall say unto thee, moreover, ' Eve profited nothing when she said, 'The serpent deceived me.'
Further, O my brethren, let us set these things in our hearts.
Come ye, let us rise up of ourselves with glad readiness.
Come ye, let us ascribe glory to God, before the darkness cometh, and before there cometh upon us that great and shining day,
concerning which the Prophet spake saying, ' Behold, God cometh!
Who shall be able to abide the day in which He cometh?
That day shall be a day of terror, a day of darkness and blackness, a day of cloud and gloom, a day of blasts of the trumpet.
Peradventure thou wilt say, 'Who shall be able to escape all these things?'
Hearken, it is I who will tell thee.
Now thou must not imagine that thou wilt escape merely by keeping thy body in a state of purity; on the contrary (these things also must thou do).
Whensoever any man doeth unto thee that which is evil thou must do unto him that which is good in return.
Whensoever men make false accusations against thee thou must continue to lead a well-ordered life.
Whensoever men curse (or, revile) thee, thou must bless them in return.
Whensoever thou shalt fast thou shalt not be puffed up thereby, for it is not thine abstinence from eating only which is true fasting, but also thine abstinence from sin.
It is meet for us to search carefully the Scriptures.
For observe that it was a staff of wood of the almond tree which the prophet saw at the beginning,
but afterwards it was a brazen vessel of fire which actually appeared to him, which indicated that he who will not lay hold on the rod
Moreover, in this same manner did Moses teach the people, with a pillar of light and a pillar of fire. He cried out unto every one saying-, He who will hearken to the Law shall have the enjoyment of the light which is true and pleasant, and he who will not hearken shall be delivered over to the fire.'
Read ye the Gospels, and ye shall know that when we shall go forth from this world there is nothing whatsoever which will help us.
No brother shall be able to set free (another) brother from the punishment which never endeth, and no friend shall be able to help his friend;
neither shall fathers be able to help their children, nor children their fathers.
But why should I speak of ordinary men in this manner?
For neither Noah, nor Daniel, nor Job, would be able to set free either son or daughter.
Now many times thou wilt say to me, 'What is the proof of these words?
(I will tell thee.) Consider the man who had not on him the wedding garment, and observe that, after they had cast him forth from the bridal chamber,
Consider, moreover, the five virgins, and observe that after the door of the bridal chamber had been shut in their faces (or, mouths),
none of their fellow-virgins asked the bridegroom for a recompense for those whom Christ called foolish
and those who are on (His) left He Himself casteth forth into the outer darkness, and none of those who are on the right hand is able to help them.
Verily, true is that proverb which saith, ' Behold the man and his work'
Behold, hast thou not heard concerning that rich man, between whom and Lazarus a gulf had been made, who wished him to sprinkle water (on his tongue) as he was burning in the place of punishment?
And thou sawest also that Abraham was not able to set the rich man free from the place of punishment, although the rich man entreated him (to do so).
Ought we not, then, to help ourselves in this world, and to ascribe glory to God before the darkness cometh, that is to say, before we are banished into the darkness?
It is far better to have our tongue parched in this world by fasting than for us to wish to have water sprinkled (upon it) in that place where water will not be given unto us.
Let us put forth our utmost endeavour to free ourselves from this great torture through a few sufferings in this world.
Remember when the fever of sickness cometh upon us, or a few disasters (or, calamities), or when we look upon those who are punished by the judge in (this) world, whereupon horror and quaking seize upon us, notwithstanding the fact that both the punishment and the place of judgement (endure) only for a very short space of time, remember,
I say, what manner of punishment it shall be in the place of jiidgement in the Other World which is to come, wherein we shall be punished for endless ages.
For sickness bringeth to nought the strength of the body, and even the beauty of the bodily form decayeth through old age.
And in short, everything which is in this world becometh like unto the web of the spider, and like unto dreams.
Rightly, therefore, did the Saviour ascribe blessing to those who afflict themselves so that the pleasures of this world may not prevail over them.
And let us pray with the holy man David, and say unto God, ' I will bless Thee seven times in the day because of the judgement of Thy righteousness'
If the friendship of a good man converteth him that meeteth with him to that which is excellent, how much more will he be benefited who holdeth converse with God, by night and by day, by means of prayer?
Ponder beforehand upon the death which thou shalt die in thy members which are upon the earth, and (remember) that the day of God shall come like a thief.
When those who are to bear away thy soul shall come after thee thou wilt say, ' Be merciful unto me, for I will fast, I will do deeds of mercy, I will repent.'
And they shall say unto thee, c Didst thou, then, not hear God Who cried out saying, 'The kingdom which is in the heavens hath drawn nigh?'
Didst thou, then, not hear Paul saying, 'Whilst we have time with us let us do the thing which is good?'
He who desireth salvation hath no need of a long time [for repentance].
The thief had no need of a long time for repentance; he believed earnestly, and he gained Paradise.
Moreover, we see physicians inflicting pain on men, and we also see the governors who sit on the seat of judgement inflicting righteous punishments on the thieves, and this they do in order that through the sufferings of others we may be admonished.
And now, O my beloved, since we are rooted in the faith, let us increase in knowledge ; from knowledge (let us proceed) to love, and from this to the inheritance which is in the heavens.
Let us persist obstinately in prayer, as it is written.
or this reason is it good that we should continue to exercise ourselves in our work at all times, and even if no temptations come upon us, the exercise will certainly do thee no harm whatsoever, nay, on the contrary, thou wilt benefit thyself exceedingly.
Therefore it is meet for us to keep watch on every side, so that evil may not break into our souls.
When once the soul hath tasted sin, it will continue in a state of unconsciousness, and will go on adding greatly to the sickness of sin.
For this reason what we ought to do is to drive back once and for all the beginnings of sin, just as we should drive back a horse which is uncontrolled.
For the works of men are in no wise different from dreams and shadows, and they are like the rushing torrent which floweth swiftly away.
Hold not to be marvellous things the possessions and the riches of this world, but observe how they are transferred from this man to that, and how they pass from that man to another
for this reason it is right that we should despise them.
For very right is the word which is written that saith, ' The things which are seen are those that are for a time, whilst the things which are not seen are those which are for ever'
The latter things are incorruptible and indestructible, and they abide without change.
Let us therefore do our utmost to acquire these things for ourselves.
Let us strive eagerly for these things, for otherwise it is unlikely that we shall be able to acquire any of these for ourselves, when we shall go forth from this life.
For he who striveth in the contest receiveth not the crown if he abandoneth the contest; therefore let us seize and carry off the crown, and we shall thus escape disgrace and loss.
Now the Scripture saith, 'He whose possessions are consumed with fire shall suffer loss'
Now what kind of burning with fire is that which shall be to us?
And what kind of thing is the outer darkness?
And what kind of things are the place of Weeping and the gnashing of teeth?
Take these things into thy heart, and guard thou thy soul and keep in virgin state until the Bridegroom cometh in His glory.
And do thou sing psalms saying, ' My soul is in thy hands at all times' I do not forget Thy Law.'
And say, 'Thou art He Who doth deliver me from the snare of the hunter.'
Let thy lamp be burning, and permit not thyself to fall asleep.
And if slumber be sweet to thee in the night season, yet know thou that there is nothing sweeter than the Psalms.
For the holy man (David) said, 'Thy words are sweeter in my throat than honey in the mouth.'
The martyrs gave their own souls for the Name of God
let us bring as an offering (to Him) our life of self-denial.
Remember that some of the martyrs were laid upon coals of fire :
Although thou mayest weep occasionally for thy sins, thou hast not as yet done as Paul did, who wept for the salvation of others.
Vanquish suffering by means of hope.
For the Scripture saith, ' Tribulation worketh patience, and patience hope, and hope giveth birth to shamefacedness.'
Consider, moreover, that pleasure (endureth) only for a short time, and that punishment lasteth for ever.
For thou knowest that, after the people (of Israel) had passed over the sea, without being drowned, Moses himself became master of the land through the appetite of the belly.
Lay fast hold, therefore, at all times upon these teachings which are full of salvation, and keep thou them, and fulfil thou them, so that the Holy Trinity may be glorified through thee, Father, and Son, and Holy Spirit, henceforward, and always, for all ages of ages. Amen.
But where shall those who are living in the desert, for God's sake, find a man if trouble come upon them?
If they are hungry where can they find food?
If they are thirsty where can they find water to drink?
When they begin to lead the life of the anchorite they rejoice exceedingly because of hunger, and thirst, and the excellence of their manner of life.
And the Adversary who fighteth with them to tempt them thereby doth not wish them to continue the life of the anchorite, for he knoweth that the reward is great which they will receive from God when they shall come forth from the body.
When they are preaching ascetic labours the compassion of God cometh upon them, and He maketh the angels to serve them in respect of their food, and He bringeth for them water out of the rock.
For it is written in Isaiah, Those who abide patiently in the Lord shall renew their strength.
They shall spread out their wings like the eagles in flight.
They shall fly away and shall not fall.
They shall journey and shall not suffer hunger.
He saith, Water shall be brought to them out of the rock.
When they suffer hunger He will make the grass which is in the field to be sweet to their mouths, even as honey is sweet.
If tribulation come upon them, or danger rise up against them, straightway they spread out their hands and they pray to the King Jesus until there cometh to them speedily His help which He sendeth forth, and straightway He strengtheneth them because of the integrity of their heart in respect to Him.
Hast thou never heard that which is written, The Lord will not forsake His people, and the patient endurance of the miserable man shall not fail utterly?
And again, the poor man crieth out,
and the Lord heareth him,
and delivereth him in all his tribulations.
The Lord giveth unto every man according to what he hath suffered.
Blessed is the man who shall do the will of God upon the earth!
I say unto thee that the angels shall serve him from the time when he entereth the body, and they shall comfort him at all times in his need.
And to me, your brother, when I had heard these things from these perfect men of God, they became like unto honey, which is sweet in my belly,
and a mighty ecstasy took place within me,
and I became like unto those whose minds are carried away into another world.
And I rose up straightway,
and I took a few bread cakes with me, sufficient for the four days' journey, so that I might eat of them until I arrived at the place which God should appoint for me.
``And when I had come forth from the monastery I looked,
and I saw a being of light before me,
and I was afraid,
and I thought in my mind that I would turn back to the place to which I came first of all, and remain there(?).
And when he knew that I was afraid, he said unto me, `Fear not,
for I am the angel that dwelleth with thee, and that hath travelled with thee from thy childhood;
this stewardship, which the Lord hath appointed to thee, thou shalt be able to fulfil.'
``And when I had come into the mountain, and I had journeyed in the desert for six or seven miles,
I saw a cave,
and I turned towards it, for I saw that there was a man inside it.
And a very great saint of God came out to me; now this form (or, behaviour) was goodly, and there was a fine graciousness over his countenance.
And when I had seen him, I made obeisance unto him.
And he raised me up,
and he saluted me,
and he said unto me, `Thou art Onnophrios, my fellow worker in the Lord;
Come in.
The Lord be with thee. Thou shalt succeed in the good work whereunto He hath invited thee.'
And I went inside,
and I sat down there with him for a few days,
and I learned the rules of the doctrine of God from him,
and he taught me the regulations which governed the life of the monk in the desert.
And when he saw that I was acquainted with the hidden and terrible fighting which existed in the desert, he said unto me, `Rise up, my son, and let me take thee to a desolate place in the inner desert, and thou shalt abide therein by thyself for God's sake.
Since God hath appointed thee to this work thou must dwell in the desert.
And straightway he rose up, and journeyed with me into the desert for a distance of four days' journey,
and at the end of the four days we came to a small hut,
And he said unto me, 'This is the place which the Lord hath appointed thee to live in.'
And he sat down with me for a month of days, until I understood the good work which it was meet for me to do.
And afterwards he departed from me,
and we never saw each other again until this year when I saw him once on the day whereon he laid down the body,
and I buried him inside the place wherein he was.''
And I (i.e. Papnoute) said unto him, ``My good and beloved father, at the beginning, when thou didst first come to this place, didst thou suffer from the weather?''
And the blessed old man said unto me, ``I suffered greatly on several occasions from hunger, and thirst, and the heat outside in the daytime, and the great cold by night,
and my flesh was wasted away by the dews of heaven.
And when God [saw] that I endured patiently in my good strife of fasting, and that I gave my heart to ascetic practices, He made holy angels serve me, and bring to me my daily food, and an angel gave it to me evening by evening, and he stood by my body.
For it is written, Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word which cometh forth from the mouth of God doth man live.
If thou doest the will of God, He shall take care of thee in every place.
For He hath said in the Holy Gospel, Take no care for what ye shall eat, or for what ye shall drink, or with what raiment ye shall clothe yourselves, for your Father Who is in heaven knoweth of what things ye have need without your asking Him.
Seek ye His kingdom and His righteousness,
and these things shall be added unto you.
And when I had heard these things I marvelled exceedingly, and I said unto him, ``O my holy father, where dost thou partake of the Sacrament on the Sabbath Day and on the First Day of the week?''
And he said unto me, ``O my holy father, an angel cometh and administereth to me the Sacrament on the Sabbath Day and on the First Day of the week.
And the angel cometh and administereth the Sacrament to every one who is in the desert,
and he giveth unto them consolation.
And, moreover, when they desire to see any one, they are taken up into the heights of heaven, and they see all the saints, and they salute them, and thereby their hearts receive light, and they rejoice, and are glad with God in those good things.
And when they see them they receive consolation, and they forget that they have suffered in any way; and afterwards they return to their bodies, and they continue to feel comforted for a very long time.
And when we had finished the prayer we gave (i.e. said) the 'Amen',
and we sat down together
and talked on about the majesty of God.
And at the time when the sun was about to set I looked
and I saw a loaf of bread and a vessel of water.
And he said unto me, ``Rise up, my brother, and eat, and drink this small quantity of water, for I see that thou art exhausted by hunger and thirst, and by the toil of the road.''
And I said unto him, ``As God Almighty liveth, I will neither eat nor drink unless we stretch ourselves out and eat the bread together.''
And he said unto me, 'O my son, may God not cause thee to grieve about any matter whatsoever, and may He strengthen thee in His love, so that thine eyes may receive the light of His Godhead, and so that thou mayest neither lean to one side nor fall, but mayest end successfully the work whereunto thou has set thy hand.
May the angels shelter thee, and deliver thee from the plottings of the Jews, and may no accusation fall upon thee when thou hast to meet God.'
And when he had made an end of saying these things he rose up,
and prayed to God with sighings and many tears;
and afterwards he laid himself upon the ground,
and he completed his stewardship in God, and yielded up his spirit into the hand of God on the sixteenth day of the month Paone.
And I heard the voices of the angels singing hymns before the blessed Apa Onnofrios, and there was great joy at his meeting God.
And I took off the garment wherewith I was clothed,
and tore it into two pieces; in the one I wrapped up [the holy man] for burial, and the other I used as raiment, so that I might not be naked.
And I placed his body down in a cleft in the rock,
and I heard the sounds of a multitude of angels rejoicing, and crying out, 'Alleluia;'
and I said my prayer over him, and I rolled several stones upon him.
And I stood up
and prayed the second time, and straightway the palm-tree fell down,
and I marvelled exceedingly at what had taken place;
and I ate what was left of the bread, and I drank of the water which was left to us.
And when I perceived that it was not according to the will of God for me to remain in this place, I spread out my hands,
and I prayed unto the Lord; and behold, the man who had come to me at the first, and who had given me strength, came to me again as he had done before.
And he said unto me, 'My God, our Lord, informed us this day that thou wast coming to us in this place.
Behold, for six years we have seen no man except thyself.'
And when we had talked together for a long time . . . . . .
. . . said unto him, ``O our brother, stablish thy heart with a little bread, for thou hast travelled from a place afar off.
The Lord hath ordained that we are to remain with each other for some days,
and we will rejoice with thee, O our beloved brother.''
And whilst we were talking to each other, behold, five loaves of bread were brought in, and they were warm and soft as if they had been [just] baked in the oven,
And whilst we were talking to each other, behold, five loaves of bread were brought in, and they were warm and soft as if they had been [just] baked in the oven,
 and we sat down and ate together.
And he said unto me, ``Behold, this is the sixth year since we came to this place,
and four loaves of bread have been allotted to us daily, and these came to us through God;
but as soon as thou didst come unto us this day, behold, a fifth loaf hath been brought for thee.
And we have never known whence they came, but when we came in we found them placed here.''
And when we had finished eating together we passed the whole night in praying, and we prayed till morning.
And when the morning had come I entreated them to let me remain with them until the day of my death.
And they said unto me, 'O our brother labourer, it is not ordained for thee to tarry in this place.
And when I had journeyed away from them for some days I came to a well of water,
and I sat down there for a little because of [my] fatigue; and large trees were growing by the well.
And when I had refreshed myself and had rested a little, I walked among the trees, and I marvelled,
and I said unto myself, ``Who was it that planted them in this place?''
And among them there were date-palms, loaded with fruit, and citron trees, and pomegranate trees, and fig trees, and apple trees, and vines, and dorakion trees, and kisma trees, and trees which emitted sweet odours.
And the well supplied water, and it watered all the trees which were growing in that place.
And whilst I was marvelling at the trees, and was looking at them, and at the fruit that was on them, behold four young men appeared in the distance, and their forms were goodly, and they were dressed in fine skin garments which, as it were, covered all their bodies.
And when they had come up to me they said unto me, ``Hail, thou man of God, O our beloved brother!''
And it came to pass that when the Saviour had risen from the dead, He came on to the Mount of Olives, and sat down. And He made a cloud to envelop all the countries wherein were the Apostles,
and it gathered them together into the presence of the Saviour upon the Mount of Olives.
And John answered and said unto the Saviour, ' My Lord,
behold Thou didst say unto me : Thou art My beloved one, and thou hast found grace before Me.
Then the Apostles became like unto dead men,
and they fell down upon the earth through fear;
But the Saviour took hold of their hands, and raised them up, and removed the fear from them, and stablished their hearts for them.
And John answered (and said), 'My Lord, explain to me the order of the Cherubim, which is exceedingly terrible.'
The Saviour made answer and said unto John,
 Hearken unto Me, and I will shew you everything.
Thou seest the Cherubim.
The words of the Father are hidden within him, from their beginning until their fulfilment.
Behold, I will make him to come to thee so that he may explain everything, O My beloved John.'
And the Saviour turned Himself towards the Cherubim, and He said unto him, 'I tell thee to take My beloved John into heaven.
And thou shalt explain unto him every question which he shall ask thee.'
If only men were to know of the supplications of Michael at the time when the water should come upon the earth, they would never commit sin at all.
However, Michael taketh with him twelve times ten thousand angels, and they go into the presence of the Father,
and they cast themselves down before Him,
and they do not rise up again until God sendeth the waters down upon the world.'
Then I answered and said unto the Cherubim, 'I have heard one say
that 'God created the heavens and the earth',
and again, that 'God created the waters from the beginning.'
 And the Cherubim, ‘Hearken, and I will inform thee concerning everything.
Before ever God created the heavens and the earth, water was in existence, and there is no one whatsoever who knoweth anything about the creation of water except God Himself.
For this reason whosoever shall take an oath which is false, in the name of water, shall never receive forgiveness.
And whosoever shall take an oath [which is false] by the wheat-plant,
[shall also never receive forgiveness, for], the same ordinance applieth to both the water and the wheat-plant.'
And I said to the Cherubim, ' My Lord, I wish that thou wouldst inform me concerning the matter of the wheat-plant, and tell me where, in the beginning, before the earth had been cultivated,
it was found that man might live upon it.'
The Cherubim said unto me, ' Hearken, and I will inform thee concerning everything.
Now it came to pass that God having created Adam placed him in the Paradise of joy, and He gave him a command saying thus: 'Of every tree which is in Paradise thou shalt eat, with the exception of the tree of the knowledge of that which is good and of that which is evil; of that thou shalt not eat. And on the day wherein thou shalt eat thereof thou shalt certainly die.'
Now the Devil was jealous of Adam when he saw with what great glory he was surrounded.
The Sun and the Moon, the two great luminaries, used to come daily and worship Adam before they rose above the earth.
And the Devil went and led astray Adam and his wife, until at length they were cast forth out fromParadise; and they were banished to the land of Eueilat,
where Adam lived a life of care and anxiety.
Now after all these things, Adam was an hungered, and he could not find food to eat similar to that which they were wont to eat daily in Paradise.
'And he cried out to the Lord in grief and in tribulation of heart.
And the Son of graciousness (or, goodness), Who acted as sponsor for him, had compassion upon him,
and He spake unto His Good Father, the Lord of the Angels and of the Spirits, saying, 'Behold, the man whom We have created in Our image and likeness is an hungered,
and I am sorrowful on his account, O My Father. Now, if it be Thy will, do not let him die before Thy face.' And in this wise did His Father of Compassion
answer and say unto His beloved Son, ' If it be that Thou art moved with compassion for the man whom We have created, and who hath cast [My] commandment behind him,
go Thou and give him Thy flesh and let him eat thereof, for it is Thou who hast undertaken to act as his advocate.'
And the Son of Goodness made answer and said unto His Father, 'Blessed be Thy word.
That which Thou hast said I will do.'
Then the beloved Son came forth from the presence of His Good Father,
and He took a little piece of His right side, of His divine flesh,
and He rubbed it down into small pieces, and brought it to His Holy Father.
Then His Father took out a portion of His own body, and He made it into a grain of wheat, and He brought forth the seal of light wherewith He set a seal upon the worlds of light, and He sealed the grain of wheat in the middle thereof.
And He said unto His beloved Son, ' Take this, and give Thou it unto Michael, the Archangel, and let him give it unto Adam, and let him tell Adam that he and his sons shall live thereon.
And Michael shall teach him to sow it, and to gather it in at harvest.'
Then Jesus called Michael, and said unto him, ' Take this [grain], and give it unto Adam so that he and all his sons may live thereon.'
And Michael came to Adam, and he was on the Jordan,
And Michael said unto him, 'Peace be to thee!
The Lord hath heard thy prayer, and He hath sent unto thee a seed of grain.'
And when Adam heard these words from Michael, his body recovered its strength, and he came from the water, and cast himself down at the feet of Michael.
'And Michael gave unto him the grain which had been sealed with the seal of light, and he taught him how to sow it and to reap it, and he went up into heaven with [great] glory.
'Therefore the water, and the wheat-plant, and grain, and the throne of the Father stand in one category, and they are the equals of the Son of God.
Now I John saw these things, and I rejoiced when I had heard them.
And it came to pass after these things that the Cherubim raised me up upon his wing of light, and carried me into the Seventh Heaven,
and I saw mighty miracles take place therein.
I saw [there] all the ranks of the angels.
The first rank [contained] the Seraphim, who were dressed in the grain-plant, and they had golden censers in their hands, and they said, ‘Hallelujah!’
And I saw another great and wonderful thing.
Whilst I John was looking at the angels as they were all divided into ranks, I found that the name of Michael was written upon all their garments, and that the angels were crying out his name always.
And I answered and said unto the Cherubim, 'How doth it come to pass that the name of Michael is written upon their garments? And wherefore do they cry it out?’
'And the Cherubim answered and said unto me, 'No angel is allowed to come upon the earth unless the name of Michael is written upon his garments, for otherwise the Devil would lead them astray.’
After this I saw a great fountain of water, whereof the waters were as white as snow, or as I might say, its waters were like unto milk, and there was an angel standing above it,
Then the heavens opened on this side and on that and everywhere,
and I saw a great and mighty angel come forth from the heavens, and they called his name Michael,
and he was girt about the loins with a girdle of gold.
There was a sponge in his hand, wherewith he wiped away all the tears of the angel of wrath,
and he drove the Angel of Wrath afar, saying, 'Get thee gone from this fountain, thou Angel of Wrath, for thou wishest to bring a famine upon the earth.'
And I said unto the Cherubim, 'My Lord, shew me the matter of the Angel of Wrath whose eyes drop blood into the fountain'
He said unto me, 'Seest thou the Angel of Wrath? He is the Angel of Famine.
If Michael were to cease from the wiping away of his tears (of blood) which he letteth drop, and were to allow them to enter the fountain, the (water thereof) would come to an end and the dew which falleth down upon the earth, and diseases and dissensions would break out, and the land would be smitten with famine'
And moreover, he said unto me, ' There are forty legions of angels, each legion containing ten thousand angels, who sing hymns over the dew until it cometh upon the earth, without any blemish at all in it.
And Apa Victor resisted the Duke strenuously.
And the Duke said unto him
Wilt thou offer up sacrifice or not?
but Apa Victor answered him not a word.
And when the Duke saw that he would not speak, he commanded his men to bring six lighted torches, and to fasten them to his sides (or, ribs). And when they had done this he made them bring a number of red-hot pointed irons,
and they thrust them through his belly until they came out of his back.
And they did these things three times to him until his skin peeled off him.
Afterwards the Duke said unto him
Wilt thou not (now) offer up sacrifice?
And the Duke commanded his men to place hot ashes upon his head, and to put a helmet (of iron) on him
and Apa Victor did not sink under this torture.
And the Duke made them to take him off the frame of the rack,
and to lay him upon the bed of iron and to kindle a fire beneath it.
And he made them pour burning sulphur and pitch, (mixed with other) inflammable substances, down his throat
And the Duke said unto him, 'Hearken unto me, and do not die a death of torture.
Is it not better for thee to be with me? Do thou not wish to live with me? Dost thou not know that thy Lords, the Emperors, arc they who have written (to me) concerning thee?'
And Apa Victor was not able to answer a word because of the pain which he was suffering from his torturing for the bed of iron was exceedingly hot under him.
And the Duke said unto Apa Victor
Speak one word into me, and I will release thee, O thou unholy exile!
And Apa Victor said unto the Duke
Seeing that I did not hearken unto my father nor unto the Emperor when they made entreaty to me, and seeing that I continued my disobedience to the point that I forsook all my possessions
And Apa Victor stood up and prayed in the midst of the fire, saying
I beseech thee, O my Lord Jesus the Christ, to be unto me a helper, and to assist me in all my tribulations, for I am a wretched and most miserable creature, in order that all this city may know that there is no other God besides Thee, Who art (God) alone.'
And at that very moment the holy Arehangel Michael came down from heaven
and went into the furnace of the bath
and spread out his holy apparel over Apa Victor,
and he caused the flame of fire to become like the dew at the first hour of the day. And he lifted him up on his wing of light, and the wing turned  into a green meadow.
And Michael broke the iron fetters which were fastened upon his hands and his feet
Apa Victor remained talking to together concerning the mysteries of the kingdom which is in the heavens, and the city of the righteous.
And after [these things] the Duke said unto those who were sitting with him, and unto the men of Rakote
O ye Alexandrians, Jesus shall not deliver him out of my hands, for there arc no gods besides Apollo and Artemis
And the Duke stripped off his clothes in order that he might go into the bath to bathe, and Michael raised up the (stone) slab of the bath, and thrust Apa Victor upon it.
And Ana Victor said unto the Duke,
O thou lawless man, why dost thou revile my God? Thou art wondering where thy god Apollo is, and thou sayest, 'Offer up sacrifice unto the gods who cannot move'
Nevertheless thou knowest well that there is power in my God to deliver me from thy tortures.
And Armenius the Count said unto him,
This day do I know that thou art an arch-magician, and that thou dost work magic'
And the Duke set out to leave the bath, and he mounted his horse, and sentenced Apa Victor to be beheaded.'
And the magistrates (or, authorities) and the people of Rakote made entreaty to the Duke that he would not put Apa Victor to death in their city
because they were afraid lest Apa Victor's father would destroy the whole city on account of it, saying
'He is a mighty general. Let him be banished to the south of Egypt, and let them put Apa Victor to death there.'
Then the Duke meditated within himself, saying,
What shall I gain by making his father an enemy of mine?
Then the Duke took a sheet of skin, and he wrote thereon the following words:
I, Armenius, the Duke of Rakote, write to Eutuchianus, the Count of the Thebaid.
And on the twentieth day of Pharmoute they banished the blessed man Apa Victor,
and four soldiers brought him to the south in ten days.
There was a collar of iron about his neck, and there were chains on his hands, and ankle-fetters on his legs, and the torturings had made him weak and helpless.
And when the soldiers arrived at Antinoe they tied up the boat to the shore
and they found that the governor had that day departed for the south.
And they unfurled their sail, and set out for the south
and they overtook the Count (of the Thebaid) as he was lying becalmed in mid-stream, for there was no wind.
And the soldiers brought Apa Victor into the lower part of the boat — now he had neither eaten nor drunk for twelve days —
and they delivered him over to Eutuchianus, the Duke
and they gave him a supply of food according to what the Count of Rakote had commanded.
And Apa Victor said in his heart,
There is something which this lawless man shall do for me, besides that which is in my body.'
Then the Count Eutuchianus commanded them to tie up the boat to the shore, and to set up his seat of justice at that place.
And when the morning of the following day had come they prepared for him a seat of justice there.
And Apa Victor passed the whole night in the lower part of the boat, blessing God and saying,
Blessed art Thou O King of all the ages (or, worlds) the Father the Almighty, and Thine only- begotten Sou Jesus the Christ, our Lord, Who hast delivered me in every place whither they have taken me.
And Eutuchianus said unto him,
For what reason didst thou not offer up sacrifice before thou didst submit to these tortures?
However, come now, and offer up sacrifice with the men who are here, so that it may be well with thee.'
And Apa Victor answered and said,
I am not at all afraid of men, and I will not offer up sacrifice, but I am afraid of my Lord Jesus the Christ.
For it is written, 'Be not afraid of those who can kill your bodies upon the earth, because there is nothing besides this which they can do unto you. But fear ye Him Who hath the power to destroy your souls and your bodies in Gehenna.'
And the Duke said unto him,
Hast thou come hither to persuade (or, convert) us by a homily which is vain?
If thou darest again to utter words in my presence I will make my servants to tear out thy tongue.
Unless thy father compel me to release thee I will not set thee free, and though profane and sacrilegious persons ought not to be cast into the furnace of a bath, thou art worthy of death,
and death shall now be thy portion.'
And the Duke commanded his servants to fasten the hands of Apa Victor behind him,
and they cut out his tongue and cut off the outer parts of his lips. And he made them bring out his necessary organs, and poured boiling oil upon them
And the Duke said unto him,
Wilt thou offer sacrifice or not,
or wilt thou die by torture?'
And the blessed man Apa Victor said unto the Duke,
Woe be unto thee, O Duke!
Thou deniest God for the sake of things which have been made by the hands of man, and thou and thine Emperors shall be punished with severe punishment.'
And Eutuchianus was wroth, and he took an oath by the life of the Emperor and by the lives of the gods,
and he said unto Apa Victor, 'Since thou wilt not sacrifice, and since thou hast been put to shame on the rack,
I must destroy thee by banishment until thou shalt die.'
nd Epiphanius the recorder answered and said,
Hearken unto me, and let me say this thing unto thee, O my Lord Count.
Behold, there is a certain Camp very far away in the south which is deserted, and there is no man living in it.
Behold, it is fifteen years since I became a soldier, and (during that time) I have never seen any one in it.
Now, therefore, banish Apa Victor to that place, (and keep him there) until he shall die.'
And the Count of the Thebaid commanded (that this should be done, and he passed) sentence on him, saying,
I, Eutuchianus, hereby command that this profane man Victor be taken to the Camp of Hierakion and that he be compelled to remain there until he die.'
And the noble man Apa Victor was strong and of good courage, and he related to the four (soldiers) his sufferings in the place of torture up to that time.
And it came to pass on a certain day that Apa Victor was outside the place of torture and the Devil came unto him in the form of a soldier, and said unto him,
Hail, Apa Victor.
I am a soldier of the imperial Palace, and thy father hath sent me unto thee to give thee this message:
Rise up, come back to me here, so that I may make thee a general.
Have I not suffered pain [in longing] for thee? Come back, so that I may make thee [a general].
Wilt thou not hearken unto me?
It is thou thyself alone who hast drawn upon thy head these sufferings.
Other people, strangers, are eating up thy goods.'
Dost thou not know that thou art an only son,
and that thy parents have no son (but thee) to succeed them?
They have adopted (?) as a son the offspring (?) of (one) of their slaves.
And now he rideth the horses, and (the Emperor) hath made him a Count in thy place.
He weareth thine apparel, and meanwhile thou art destroying thy soul with tribulations. And behold, thou art dwelling in this desert place!
Art thou not afraid lest thieves attack thee by night?
Then the Devil began to produce a written letter,
and he unrolled it before Apa Victor, and said unto him,
Look at this, and thou wilt recognize the handwriting of thy father and his seal.'
And when the hater of what is good, that is to say, the Devil, saw him, he became angry with a very great anger, for he could not contain himself when he saw the great ascetic labours which John performed in his daily life, and the great renown (which he obtained).
Therefore the Devil brought into his mind the remembrance of his parents,
and he endeavoured continually to make him remiss in his exercises. And moreover he made him to become more and more apathetic in the observance of his frequent fastings, and his vigils which lasted the whole night long.
And the body of John became weak and infirm, and he became more and more emaciated.
And when the Archimandrite saw him he marvelled at the weakness which had come upon him, for he was wellnigh ready to die,
and he said unto him, ' Have I not told thee from the very beginning that God doth not demand from us anything which is beyond our strength,
and yet thou hast made thyself weak and helpless through the exhaustion caused by thine excessive labours?
And on the morrow John rose up and came to the Archimandrite,
and cast himself down at his feet, and wept, saying, ' O my lord father wish to see my parents,
but I entreat thee to I pray for my wretched state, and perhaps thou wilt continue to do so, that God may make me perfect in patient. endurance until I trample upon all the powder of the Enemy; besides the command (hath come) to me to go.'
Then the Archimandrite assembled all the brethren that they might pray mighty prayers over him, and weep over him many tears,
and after that he sent him away, saying, 'My son, go thou in the Name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost
for it is He Who shall go with thee, and it is He Who shall guide thee.'
And John rose up and took the Gospel of gold which his parents had prepared for him,
and he entreated the remainder of the old men to pray for him.
And at that moment John rose up, and saluted all the brethren, saying, 'Pray for me, O my fathers and my brethren
And having received the salutation of the brethren he came forth from the monastery and departed.
And when he had travelled a short distance from the monastery he turned his face round
and looked at the monastery,
 and he wept bitterly and shed many tears.
And after the weeping he went on his way until he drew nigh to the entrance of the city.
And whilst he was travelling along he met a very infirm man who was dressed in ragged garments, and in pieces of shrivelled leather(?).
And John said unto him, ' Hail, my brother!
Come and walk with me.'
And the brother said unto him, 'Hail, my lord brother!
As soon as ever I had seen thee I rejoiced. Let us walk together.'
And John said unto him, 'I see that thou art exceedingly weary, and that the apparel which is on thee is in rags.
I beseech thee to give them to me, and I will give unto thee the apparel which I am wearing.'
And straightway John stripped his apparel off him and stood naked, and gave it unto the infirm man.
And the infirm man blessed John,
and they marched on together until they arrived at the city into which the infirm man was going;
and they straightway saluted each other, and each man went his own way.
And when John had arrived at the city wherein his parents were
he cast himself down upon his face and wept,
and he worshipped the Lord, saying, ' O my Lord Jesus the Christ, forsake Thou me not.'
And straightway he came into the gateway of his parents, and he cast himself down by the threshold of the door,
And straightway John sat down by the door of the gateway of the house of his parents,
 and he slept there until the morning.
And on the following' morning- the porter opened the door of the gateway, according to custom,
and when he saw John sitting by the door, dressed in very ragged apparel,
he said unto him, ' O man, what hath come to thee that thou darest to come into this place,
and to sit down herein dressed in such filthy garments?
Get up out of the place wherein thou art sitting, and let me clean it before my master cometh down,
for if thou do not, and he see thee, he will quarrel with me.'
And John said anto him, 'I entreat thee, O my brother, do not cast me outside, for I am an infirm and miserable man.'
And the porter had compassion upon him,
and allowed him to sit inside his parents' gateway.
And at the time of dawn his parents came out,
and John saw them,
and he wept tears in such great quantities that his whole body was soaked thereby,
and John communed with himself, saying, 'Behold my parents!
Thou hast seen them.
 My Lord Jesus the Christ, forsake Thou me not.'
nd he sat in the gateway of his parents for a full year.
And his father sent unto him his food every day from his own table, not knowing that he was his son.
And John said unto him, 'My brother, I beseech thee do not thou withdraw from me thy gracious kindness which thou hast shewn me hitherto,
but do thou make for me a little hut, and a little space wherein I can go, so that thy lady may not quarrel with thee.'
And the things which were sent unto John every day he gave away in charity to the poor and to those who were in want, and he ate no part of them himself except bread and salt.
And the brethren in the city who were helpless came to him, and he fed them.
And the body of John through his excessive labours became so greatly emaciated that his bones became ever more and more apparent (through his skin).
And after ten years of days, when the Good God had seen the greatness of his self abnegation, and his ascetic labours, and his fortitude, the Lord appeared unto him by night in a vision, and said unto him, 'Hail, John!
Inasmuch as, according to the name which hath been given unto thee, that is to say, John, thou hast lived the life of a virgin as did he (i. e. John the Apostle), and hast forsaken this world, and all the glory thereof,
behold, the period of the sufferings which thou hast suffered hath come to an end, and all the contendings which thou hast undertaken in My Name.
Three days longer remain unto thee in this world before thou art to come up to Me in the heavens, wherein thou shalt rest with My saints,'
And John rose up from the vision,
and he wept, saying, ' I bless Thee, my Lord Jesus the Christ.
I am wholly unworthy to live, (and I am not) worthy to look upon the faces of the saints.
But I beseech Thee, my Lord, on behalf of my parents, that Thou mayest incline to be gracious unto them, and to forgive them their sins, for Thou, O Almighty God, art alone sinless.'
And when the blessed John had said these things he called to the gate-keeper
There is, however, yet one other thing which I would ask of thee, namely, that thou wouldst go and inform thy mistress of a small matter which I will declare unto thee.'
But she did not wish to go to John.
And again John sent a message unto her a second time, saying, 'I would have thee to know that there remain unto me in this world (only) three more days.
If thou wilt come I will talk with thee, and will tell thee the matter before I die
and if thou wilt not come thou wilt grieve when I am dead.
And when she heard about his death she rose up and came down,
and she said unto her servant, 'Go on, take me to this place.'
Then the servant called John unto her, but his mother did not recognize him by reason of the excessive ascetic labours which he had been in the habit of performing.
Then she remembered, and she wept bitterly, and her heart was disturbed exceedingly,
and she went straig'htway to her husband,
and she shewed him the Gospel, saying, ' Is this thine?
Find out to whom it belongeth.'
And he recognized the Gospel immediately, and he said, ' Verily, this is the Gospel of our beloved son John, and besides this there is no other.
And John said unto them ' Do ye not know who I am?
And they said unto him, 'How is it possible for us to know thee?
And he said unto them ' I am John, thy son, and this Gospel of gold is that for which I entreated you,
and I took it to the place whither I went
O how great was the mourning which took place in all the city on that day!
O how great were the outbursts of grief which took place among the nobles of the city! And rich and poor, and men and women, and little and great,
And his mother, through the greatness of her sorrow, and through the disturbance caused by the multitude, forgot the oath which she had sworn to her son,
And straightway an angel came
Here endeth the strife of Saint John, wherein he was mig-hty and prevailed.
by the zeal and care of our God-loving brother Zacharias, the deacon and monk of Saint Mercurius, in the Mountain of Atbo (Apollinopolis, Edfu, or TJtfu). He had this book made with (the fruit of) his own labour, he gave it to the sanctuary of Saint Mercurius in the Mountain of Atbo,
wherein he lived, for the salvation of his own soul, in order that Saint Mercurius, and all the other saints whose memorials are written in this book, one by one, according to his name, may bless him with every spiritual and celestial blessing and may graciously grant unto him the power to endure patiently, and may deliver him from all the wiles of the Devil and of evil-doing men, and may enable him to fulfil the serviee in the Holy Place, with him that hath inherited it, that is to say, as deacon and monk.
a number of wolves attacked me;
now they ejected a lot of dung on my back, and threw up very much dust about me,
 and I was obliged to abandon the beast whereon I was riding.
And again I cried out uttering prayers to God and to my holy father, Apa Pisentius, who had delivered me from the mouths of the hyenas, saying, ' Deliver thou me at this time also from these wolves.'
And before the words had escaped from my mouth one of the wolves let out a mighty cry,
and they all turned away and fled in another direction, through the prayers of my holy father, Apa Pisentius.
(Now) they all turned away through the prayers of my father Apa Pisentius.
Now as for me, I entered into the plain of the mountain of Tsente, and I ascribed glory to God because of what had happened to me, namely that He had delivered me from the mouths of (these) evil beasts.
And when I had entered into the heart [of the mountain], I found her (i. e. the beast he had abandoned) ; and the holy man was engaged in studying [the book of a] certain prophet.
Then I took the beast into the shed for the animals,
and my father was looking down on me [as I did so] from the wall of the tower.
And he said unto me, O John; and I made answer to him, saying, 'Bless me, my father!'
And he said unto me, 'Have I not told thee that thou art not to travel by the inner road late in the day, and that thou art only to do so in the early morning?
A very little more and the wild beasts would have eaten thee up ; they would have done so now had it not been for the mercy of God.
Thus ye may see, O my beloved, that he always knew what was happening, and no matter where the place was wherein any event happened, he was always certain to know about that event.
But he kept it secret, according to the habit of his life, for he did not desire to give any man cause to give to him the approbation which appertaineth to men, even as the wise man Paul spake, saying, 'I seek not the pnc glory of men, nor of yourselves, nor of others.'
Now, if I wished to tell you concerning all the works which we have seen done by the blessed old man Apa Pisentius, this discourse would become inordinately long,
but inasmuch as the Scriptures inform us, saying, ' The works of God are good, make thou them manifest unto every one, I will relate unto you a few more deeds, out of a very large number, concerning the splendid acts of this perfect man, and afterwards we will bring our discourse to a close.
Now it came to pass on a day that a certain man came unto him from the district of Kebt (Coptos), and there was travelling with him his son, who had reached a time of life when he might, very properly, have been permitted to undergo the yoke of matrimony.
And the two men went together into the presence of [the holy man Apa Pisentius], and they bowed low [before him], and cast themselves down at his feet.
And the holy man said unto the man, ' Why hast thou not taken a wife for thy son?
now that man was an inhabitant of the town of Coptos.
And the man answered and said, 'My father, he is a mere boy, and hath not yet arrived at the proper age for marriage; and he is prudent.
And the holy man answered and said, 'Verily thy son is a habitual fornicator, and if thou permittest him, he will tell [thee] the truth.
The man said, 'If he be a fornicator, behold, I will put him into thy hands, so that thou mayest do unto him whatsoever it pleaseth thee.'
And the holy prophet answered and said, 'When thou goest to enter into thy village thou shalt meet a certain woman in the first street of thy village
she is the daughter of such and such a man, and that which is inside her shall bear witness to thee that it is thy son who hath been sleeping with her.
But do not think that I say this wholly and solely of myself, most assuredly not, for I have been informed concerning this matter by certain men who are worthy to be believed.
Nevertheless, if thou wilt hearken unto me thou wilt take her for him to wife, inasmuch as he hath humiliated her;
and, in truth, I shall be unable to permit him to partake of the Mysteries until he hath taken her to wife.
For the Law commandeth : 'If a man lie with a maiden unto whom he hath not been betrothed, and he take her by force, and he be [found] with her, he shall give fifty 'crowns' to her [father], now fifty shekels is the proper price of a virgin,
and he shall live with her, because he hath humbled her, whether she be a poor maiden or whether she be a rich maiden'
Now therefore, since the Devil made thy son to fall in with the woman, do thou depart, and take her for him to wife.
Do not give him the opportunity to commit sin, because God will enquire of thee concerning the salvation of his soul.
For if thou wilt make him to enter into the estate of holy matrimony, and he fall afterwards into this sin, his blood by these means shall be on his own head, and on his only.
Do not give him the chance of making thee alone the excuse for his sin before the throne of the Christ, and of saying, 'My father would not take a wife for me' for then the whole danger of his sin would be upon thee, because thou hast taught him the Law of God carelessly, even as it is pointed out in the Holy Scriptures concerning Eli, the priest, saying, 'He taught his sons the Law of God carelessly.'
Then the man answered and said, ' Every word which thou hast spoken I will truly keep,
for he who sheweth himself disobedient to thee sheweth himself disobedient towards the Christ, because the words which come forth from thy mouth are the words of life.
Then the blessed Apa Pisentius said unto him, ' The Lord be with you; depart in peace,'
and they came away from his presence, and they did as he had commanded them, and their hearts enjoyed great rest.
And again it came to pass on a day that our holy father Apa Pisentius, the bishop, passed through the village to inspect his churches.
Now when he had finished he looked on them (i. e. the people), and when he was returning to the monastery, and was passing along the way by the canal, a certain husbandman brought to him an ewe which belonged to him in order that he might make the Sign of the Cross over her.
Observe ye now the power of God.
The Sign of the Cross which the holy man made on her with his finger sank down into her womb,
and when she brought forth her lamb they found on it the Sign of the Cross with which the holy man had marked her.
Now the holy man made the Sign of the Cross on the outside of the ewe, and it appeared on the body of the lamb in the form of a piece of white wool, which was like unto snow.
And in every man who was sick, no matter of what kind his sickness might be, immediately the holy man Apa Pisentius stretched out his hand over him, and made the Sign of the Cross over him, the sickness ceased.
Come ye then, all ye whose hearts are straight in respect of God and the holy man,
and let us make supplication unto him with tears and with repentance, in order that Apa Pisentius may entreat the Christ to shew mercy upon us when it shall come to us to meet Him face to face; for it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the Living God.
Now if there be among you any one who shall be so bold as to waste his time in trying to refute the statement which I have dared to make to the effect that the holy man, Apa Pisentius, the bishop, is a companion of the Christ, let him come now and consider the words which are in the holy Gospel according to John, and let him hear God crying out by the mouth of His holy and beloved one John the Evangelist, saying, ' Ye are My companions when ye do the things which I have commanded you.
And again, 'To you whom I have called 'My friends', all the things which I have heard from My Father I have shewn unto you.'
And again 'It is not ye who have chosen Me, but it is I who have chosen you,
and I have left you in order that your fruit may be abiding, and may live for ever.'
Know ye therefore, O my beloved, that he who doeth the will of God, the same is His companion and His friend, even according to what is said in the holy Gospel, ' He who shall do the will of My Father which is in the heavens, this same is My brother, and My sister, and My mother.'
And again it came to pass on a day that they brought unto him a certain youth who was possessed of a demon,
and they besought the holy man, saying, 'Do an act of gracious goodness, and be pleased to make the Sign of the Cross over him, for the demon which possesseth him is exceedingly evil.'
And the holy man asked his father, saying, 'Did this calamity come upon him a very long time ago?'
And the father of the youth said unto him, 'Behold, it is seven years, [since we have asked] thy prayers, O my father.
And the demon is in the habit of casting him on the ground, and of making him to stagger about like a camel, his eyes being filled with blood,
and often and often this has continued until we were in despair about him, thinking that the demon would kill him.
And (sometimes) he doth not speak at all. Do an act of gracious goodness, and be pleased to help him, O my father.^
Then my father cried out unto me, ' John.'
And he said unto me, Go thou to the laver of the congregation, and bring hither to me a little water, so that I may sprinkle it upon this youth, for I cannot endure seeing this demon inflicting such severe suffering upon him.'
I went therefore into the room of the assembly, according to the command of my lord and father, the blessed Apa Pisentius, and I made Apa Elisha, the presbyter and overseer of the place (or, shrine), go into the place of the altar of sacrifice
and he poured a little of the water which was there into a vessel, and I brought it to the holy man
and the holy man dipped his finger in this water, and made the Sign of the Cross on the youth in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
And he gave some of the water to his father, saying unto him, 'Take thou thy son, and depart thou to thy house, and thou shalt give him to drink of this water which I have given thee from the laver of the congregation, and thou shalt believe in the Lord, and He shall heal him.'
Now, my father acted in this way and did not himself give the youth the water to drink with his own hands, and so make the demon come out from him immediately, lest men should ascribe praise to him, and say, Apa Pisentius hath cast the demon out of the son of such and such a man, because he did not wish to receive glorifying from the children of men.
And it came to pass that when the man had taken his son, that he might depart to his house, now, according to what the man himself confessed to me with his own mouth, (this happened) a few days after, whilst he was taking him back home, (and the man said), 'Whilst I was walking along with my son,
and when I was a long way from you, the demon suddenly hurled him to the ground, and made him writhe in agony, and then cried out inside him, Pisentius, by the Sign of the Cross which thou didst make with thy finger, thou hast driven me forth from my dwelling-place'
And immediately that the youth was purified I took him into my house with joy, and the demon never returned to him to the day of his death.'
And it came to pass that after a few days, the (father of the youth) went to the great man,
and he made obeisance to him, and he laid hold of his hand, saying, 'I tell thee that the young man is free from the demon.'
And the father of the youth confessed to him, saying, 'I tell thee, O my father, that immediately I had given him to drink of that water which thy fatherhood gave to me,
the merciful Lord graciously bestowed healing upon my son through thy holy prayers.'
And Apa Pisentius answered, saying, 'Everything is possible to him that believeth; and assuredly the water which is in the chamber of the altar of sacrifice healeth every one who believeth.
And do not think that this gracious healing is to be attributed to me, for assuredly it is in no way whatsoever due to me, but to the power of God which abideth in His holy shrine, and is given unto those who enter therein in sincere faith and with a heart wherein is no unbelief.
As for me, O my son, I am the least of anything in a matter of this kind.'
And when Apa Pisentius had said these words, the man departed from his presence, and ascribed glory to God, and rendered abundant thanks to my blessed father.
And again it came to pass on a day that the spirit of jealousy invaded the heart of a certain man,
and he became jealous about his wife.
And the Devil, the hater of that which is good, and who longeth to do evil to the race of mankind, cast a stumbling-block into the heart of her husband in respect of a man whom he believed to have had carnal intercourse with his wife.
Now the woman was innocent of that offence, and the man who was accused was himself innocent of the charge of impurity which was brought against him in respect of the woman, even as the story itself will teach us if we proceed with it to the end.
So the husband cast out his wife from his house because of the evil which existed in his own heart in respect of her.
And his father and his mother both took the greatest pains, but were wholly unable to convince the mind of the husband [of his wife's innocence], and to make him to live with her;
even according to that which Solomon spake, 'The heart of her husband is full of jealousy Finally the matter came to the ears of the clergy of his village, who had made him an assistant in the administration of the Holy Mysteries,
and the clergy informed my holy father concerning the matter.
Then my father sent a message to him, saying, 'Trouble (not) thyself : I will find for thee the defence which is necessary.
And the husband spread abroad rumours throughout the village, and he went about from place to place threatening, and saying, 'I will never again go to Pisentius;
what hath Pisentius to do with my affair?'
Now the man was a native of the town of Kebt (Coptos).
And during the time in which he was uttering (these) words he became more and more angry.
And when the sun was about to depart to his place of sunset on that same day
now it was God Who said in [the Book of] the Prophet, ' Cast [thy] dispute upon Me, I will avenge thee,' saith the Lord
a certain terrible sickness came upon that man with the darkness,
and he began to suffer great tortures in his inward parts, which caused him intense pain, and he cried out with a loud voice, saying, ' Take me to my father Apa Pisentius, for I tell thee that (these) pains have come upon me through him.
O my father, do a loving act, and help me, for indeed I am come into the straits of death (i.e. to the last gasp). And if thou dost not take me to him, I shall never find relief
And his father and his mother despaired (of his life), and thought that he would die.
And they said, 'Since he saith ''Take me to Apa Pisentius, the bishop', if he is to live, let us persuade ourselves to do as he saith.
In any case, if we take him to him, and he make the Sign of the Cross over him, at least the tortures which he is suffering will be lessened.
Now this took place very soon after my father Apa Pisentius had been made a bishop.
Then they took the sick man up to the mountain to my father, and they called out inside (the court), and I (John) went out to them.
And the father of the man said unto me, ' John, if thou wouldst ever look upon me again, do an act of love, and inform the great man,
for if thou dost not my son is in danger of dying, and I believe by God, that if he were to make the Sign of the Cross over my son he would find relief immediately.
He hath entreated me, saying, 'Take me to Apa Pisentius, the bishop, in order that I may have relief from these pains by which, through his agency, I am suffering torture.'
Now if I were to discuss the matter with the bishop in my present distracted state, I should talk like a man without understanding.'
And his son also cried out to me, saying, ' O John, do an act of love, take in the news of my arrival to the great man, for the straits of death have come upon me.
Behold thou seest me thyself in my necessity.
O why did I not keep my mouth shut, and why did I not die before I repeated the report that day?
Get thee in quickly, and inform my lord and father Apa Pisentius about my sufferings.
Help thou me, and do not abandon me to death on thy threshold
And when I had heard these things from the man and from his son, I went in and informed my father concerning (the arrival of) the man and his son.
And he said unto me, 'Keep away from him until he maketh the petition in a proper manner, for he is not a man without education.'
And I answered and said unto him, 'If I leave him outside a very little longer, he will die.
The breath which is left in him at this moment is very little, and according to what I see of him he hath contracted a fatal disease
Then my father said unto me, ' Let him (enter) in with thee.'
And when he had come in with his father, he threw himself down at the feet of my father, and remained there for a long time.
And my father said unto him, ' Rise up, O thou boorish man/
And the man answered and said, 'As the Lord liveth, if I have to pass three whole days kneeling at thy feet I will do so; unless thou liftest up thy feet on my head, I will not rise up.'
And my father laid hold upon the hair of his head,
and lifted him up, and he said unto him, 'Rise up, for behold God will bestow healing upon thee graciously, if only thou wilt hearken unto me.'
And the man answered and said, ' I swear by my necessity wherefrom thy prayers have delivered me, that whether I live one year (more) or two, I will never, never again dare to be disobedient unto thee.'
And my father answered and said unto him, ' What I have to lay upon thee is this—Thou hast driven thy wife out of thy house for no reason whatsoever.
And as concerneth the offence wherewith thou hast charged her in thy mind, she and the man also are both innocent.
But I say unto thee, supposing that thou wishest to be wholly satisfied in respect of her, and in respect of the man about whom thou hast thought evil in thy mind
now, my son, man looketh at the face only, but God looketh at the heart
when thou goest into thy house, take thy wife back into the house,
and God shall make thee to be acceptable unto her,
and if she shall incline unto thee, and shall conceive and bring forth a man child unto thee, (thou wilt know that) the report which hath been spread abroad about her is not true.
And believe me, for she is a free woman.
If, however, she shall bear thee a daughter, live not with her, but cast her forth from thy house,
for she is not innocent of the offence wherewith they have charged her, and she hath defiled her marriage (bed).
But if it be a man child which she shall bring forth, the report which hath been spread abroad about her is not true,
and she is innocent of the charge of which she was thought to be guilty.
And if thou wishest to make her swear an oath I shall not attempt to prevent thee, for the law of God giveth the following command:
If the wife of any man step out of the path, and he shall have no knowledge whatsoever of it, and another man shall lie with her and shall know her carnally, and the matter be hidden from her husband, and he knoweth nothing at all about it, and the woman herself doth not conceive, and there be no witness to stand up and testify against her, the woman shall be taken to the priest, and he shall make her take the oath, and he shall give her the water of the curse, and she shall drink it.
If the offence wherewith she is charged hath been actually committed, that water shall make her body to become covered with burning pustules (and) leprosy.
But if it be that she hath been accused falsely, she shall conceive a son.'
And now, O my son, if thou art quite satisfied about the matter, (good and well); but if not, make her take the oath. I shall not attempt to prevent thee.'
And the man answered and said, 'From that very moment when thy fatherhood (began) to speak to me my heart hath been satisfied about the matter. And I shall never po^ again hesitate to obey thee.'
And he received a blessing from the holy man, and he came forth from his presence
and departed to his house with his father, glorifying God and the holy man Apa Pisentius.
Now when he had gone into his house, he made peace with his wife, and begot a son according to the word of Apa Pisentius, who was like unto an Apostle.
And the man called the name of his son ' Pisentius ',
and he lived with his wife from that very day until the day of his death.
And the holy man performed three miracles, each of which was more wonderful than the other, and these are they: (the miracle) of the woman whom he delivered from the false accusation wherewith she had been charged; and [the miracle] of the man who was made a free man ; and the a setting free of the body of the husband of a woman, on whose navel a spell had been cast by the power of Satan,
and the making of those who had been married to live together in peace again.
Verily, exceedingly great is thy wonderful life, O thou angel of the Lord of Might!
For who is able to recount all the wonderful things which have taken place through thee, both those which belong to the period of thy youth (or, childhood), and those which have taken place during the time in which thou didst lead the life of a monk?
And as for those which took place through thy hands after thou didst become bishop, and which thou didst order, and didst wish that no man should ever gain any knowledge of them whatsoever, no man could possibly describe them completely.
Now ye must not make the soul of the blessed man to condemn me because I have related these few matters in (my) Encomium upon him, for I think that we have not exceeded the measure in declaring merely these few unimportant matters.
But let us hearken to the following commandment with which the Apostle commanded us, saying, ' Give ye unto every one such things as ye have, tribute to whom tribute is due, tax to whom tax is due, fear to whom fear is due, honour to whom honour is due/
Verily, (O Apa Pisentius,) thou art worthy of all honour and all glory, according to that which the Psalmist David saith, 'Bring honour and reverence unto the Lord, bring glory unto His holy Name'
Now hearken ye unto another great and wonderful thing, and ascribe ye glory unto the Lord!
And it came to pass on another occasion that a certain man came unto him, and made supplication unto him, saying, 'I beseech thee to perform an act of love, and to help me, O my lord and father. There is an obligation on me in respect of a certain man of thirty-six 'holokottinoi' they are pressing me urgently concerning them,
and I am not able to find them to pay them P^^ to him.
And I possess nothing whatsoever except a son, my only son, and him they have seized,
and they have put him securely in the guard-house (i. e. prison), and they are wishing to make him a slave.
I beseech thy fatherhood to shew compassion upon me.
If there was any one whom thou couldst cause to give me this small sum I could go and give it to the man, and then they would let my only son go free.'
Now that man was a soldier, and he was a native of the district, and he dwelt in a part (?) of the mountain of Teiladj.
And having heard of the fame of my father, and that he was a most charitable and generous bishop, he rose up
and came to him with his wife, and he wished to find out whether he was one who gave alms freely or not.
Now he put the woman again into the boat in which he brought her,^ and he hid thirty-six 'holokottinoi' in the boat . . . with her ;
now these he had carried off from a man whose blood he had shed,
And he came to my father wishing to try him and to see whether that which he had heard about him was true or not.
Now the day whereon he came to the holy bishop Apa Pisentius was that in which the bishop had gone into the holy congregation of Tsentei, and had taken part in the Catholic Synaxis,
for it was the day of the festival of the Archbishop and Patriarch, Apa Severus, Archbishop of Antioch.
And he sat down until Apa Pisentius came out from the congregation, when he cast himself down at his feet, and informed him of the matter whereof I have already spoken.
And when the great man had heard it, he said unto the soldier through an interpreter, 'The place of Pisentius is not a place for jesting.
Get thee gone, and take the thirtysix {sic) six 'holokottinoi' from the hand of thy wife who is on board the boat by the place of the ferry.
As for the money (?), behold, it is tied up in a bundle in her hand, and it is this which thou hast brought to tempt me therewith.
Behold now what it was that thou didst wish to do. Because thou hadst shed the blood of a man,
and hadst taken (these moneys) out of his hand, thou didst say, 'I will take them and give them as an offering for the salvation of my soul.'
Verily I say unto thee, that if the whole world were given in alms on thy behalf then the smallest act of mercy shall never be shewn unto thee, until thine own blood hath been poured out even as thou hast poured out the blood of thy neighbour, according to that which is written. Whosoever sheddeth the blood of a I man, the blood of him that sheddeth it shall be shed in its stead, because man was made according to the image of God.'
Now when the man had heard these words he marvelled exceedingly, for he thought that the matter would l)e hidden from the new Elisha, and he did not know that the Spirit which spake to the Apostles was the same as that which spake in the Prophets,
and he did not know that the same God was the God of all of them.
Now ye know, (O my beloved,) that in the beginning of this Encomium I did not fail to say that the blessed man Apa Pisentius was endowed with the gift of the Spirit,
for one whenever any man went into his presence, as soon as he had looked into his face he knew for what purpose he had come to him.
But he hated the vain approbation of men, and he hid his manner of life so that no man whatsoever might attain to the full knowledge of the same.
Now it came to pass also on another occasion when he was fleeing from before the face of the Persians (that) he might lead a life of peaceful meditation in the mountain of Djeme,
that he departed into the mountain not a little way in order that he might pray.
And when he had passed three or four hours in travelling, he prayed in place after place,
and there is no man who is able to estimate the number of the prayers which he made by day and by night.
Now, he was in the habit of praying four hundred times during the night.
And he turned to me, and he said unto me, ' Take good heed to thyself,
for I found a huge serpent in the mountain to-day ; and he is not very far from us at this moment.
But I have confidence in God that He will not permit him to remain in our neighbourhood.'
Now when the morning had come, I looked out, and at the distance of about the flight of an arrow,
I saw a very large number of birds and vultures gathered together upon a crag of the rock.
And (my father) cried out to me, and said unto me, 'I think that God hath destroyed the dragon.'
And he spake yet again unto me and said, 'Why hast thou not given thine attention to the words of the Scriptures, and understood them, according to that which the wise man David saith: Thou hast set him that was higher than thou for a place of refuge ; The evil shall not draw nigh unto thee,
neither shall the evil draw nigh to thy habitation; Thou shalt go up upon the adder and the scorpion, thou shalt tread upon the lion and the serpent; Because he hath believed in Me I will deliver him, and I will protect him because he hath known My Name;
He shall cry out unto Me, and I will hearken unto him'
And it came to pass that God wished to remove him (from this world) to the habitation of those who rejoice, the place wherefrom sorrow, and grief, and sighing have fled away, the place where are the Prophets and the Patriarchs and the Apostles,
for he was a Patriarch like Abraham, and an Apostle like unto the Apostles, and a Prophet like unto the Prophets, even like unto Samuel, and those who came after him,
and he was a high priest (worthy of) reverence, even as were Moses and Aaron and those who came after them.
And when he had come to the end of the sickness through which he went to his rest, now it was in the month of Epep of the fifth year (?), he cried out to me on the night of the eighth day of Epep, and he said, ' John, is there any one with thee?'
And I said, 'There is no one with me save Moses, and Elisha the Elder, who have come to visit thee.'
And my father cried out, 'Moses, Moses, Moses.
Be careful to make thy life exceedingly correct.
Thou knowest in what manner thou hast been brought up by me.
Take thou great care of my parchment books, for thou wilt have great need for them. And thou shalt not escape from this burden.'
And again he turned to Elisha the Presbyter, and said unto him, Elisha, 'Govern thou most carefully the brethren. Lay fast hold upon the things which I have commanded thee, and do thou pne summon the brethren regularly each hour in order that they may recite their offices according to the rules of the brethren, and do good to their souls through thee.'
Then Elisha answered and said unto him, 'My father, I have approached (the time) for going to all my fathers.
If thou art going to die it is better that I should die first, for if the pillar whereon we are all firmly established shall fall, the destruction of the mountain of Tsentei will draw nigh.
And where shall we find another who will shepherd us as thou hast done, O my lord and holy father, if thou dost depart?
Thou hast directed and made straight the course of thy ship to the haven which is fair.
Thou hast prepared thyself, and thou shalt never be disturbed (or, troubled), according to the words of the gentle David, (who said,) I have prepared myself, I shall never be disturbed' (or, troubled).
For we shall feel the lack of thee sorely, and we shall be orphans from this day forward.
And my father answered and said unto me, 'Verily, five days were given unto me from the third day.'
And I answered and said unto him, 'What was it that happened unto thee that thou sayest these things to me?'
And he said unto me, 'Before I spake unto thee an ecstasy came upon me, and a man of light came and stood before me.
And he said unto me, 'Pisentius, Pisentius, Pisentius!'—three times
prepare thyself, for there remain unto thee in this world five days, and then thou shalt come to me.'
And when he had said these things unto me, he departed.
And now, behold, I must depart the way of all my fathers.'
And when my father had said these things unto me, a great outcry broke forth with tears and sobs in (our) midst; ' Thus are we bereaved of our good father, the consoler of those who were in trouble, who gave penitence to the sinner, who provided the poor with food, and who made it his care to find clothing for their bodies.'
And I confess unto you, (O my beloved), here in the presence of God, that from the time when my father heard concerning the Persians, he never applied to his own use any of the things which could be of use to the poor, even to the cap upon his head, but he distributed everything, and gave it in alms to the poor.
The things which he gave with his own hands, and the things which he commanded me to give, and the things which he sent to the faithful, village by village, and which were distributed to each man according to his need, no man can possibly know the sum thereof.
Only God, unto Whom all praise be given, knoweth it.
And I said unto my holy father, who arrayed himself in Christ, Apa Pisentius, 'Peradventure, O my father, dost thou think that we shall not again devote ourselves (to the poor), if thou dost not bequeath any possessions which may remain to us?'
My father answered and said unto me, ' We must devote ourselves to the will of God, O my son, and whatsoever thou givest—everything—to the poor,
the Lord will give unto us twofold.'
What can I say (more), or what can I relate of the valiant deeds of this just man ?
But now let us devote ourselves to the consideration of his laying down the body.
Now he passed three days wherein he neither ate nor drank, neither did he speak unto us, nor turn from one side to the other, but he lay stretched out like a dead man in the hall of the large cell.
Then he cried out, 'John,' and I answered, 'Bless me.'
He said unto me, 'I have come nigh unto my departure, and I shall finish my course at the time when the sun shall set to-morrow, which shall be the thirteenth day.
But take good heed and do not permit any man to carry my body away from the place which shall be dug for it.
During these three days which I have just passed wherein I held no converse with you, I have been standing in the presence of God, and my speech hath been taken away since the ninth hour yesterday.
I tell you that God will shew His mercy unto me.'
And I said unto him, 'Do one act of grace, O my father, and partake of a very small quantity of nourishment, for behold, it is now four days since thou hast tasted anything at all.'
And my father answered and said unto me, 'My son, shall I eat anything else after (this) word?
I say that I will not taste any food whatsoever belonging to this world,
I shall eat nothing at all until I depart to the Christ, and break my fast with Him.'
And it came to pass that when the light had risen on the thirteenth day of the month Epep, he said unto me—now there were also certain great men sitting by him—' John, thou knowest all my affairs, and that I have nothing left belonging to the bishopric (or) to the town of Kebt (Coptos) wherewith to bury my body.
Nevertheless, I had one good 'holokottinos' by me, which I had kept since the day when I lived a life of contemplation in my cell and when I was a monk.
This I made to yield an increase through the work of my hands, and I have guarded it carefully until the day wherein I should have to clothe my body with the work of my hands, so that I might not leave behind me a matter of unpleasantness for those who should succeed me,
 and who would say. Thou hast broken a custom which was seemly.
Do thou then, O John, buy a covering for my body, and do not put on me anything except the shroud wherein I am wrapped, and my monk's dress, and my skull-cap, and my girdle, and my tunic—only these—and ye shall prepare me for burial and ye shall bury me.
And I think. Behold a garden wherein they will bury me.
And behold, a place full of wolves, but they will throw a wall about [me], each one working at it according to his good pleasure.
But whatever each man doeth, let no man rebuke him, saying. The wall must be thrown round (the grave).'
And when the holy father Apa Pisentius, the holy bishop, had said these things, he cried out to us, and spake words unto (each) one of us,
and then he opened his mouth, and yielded up his spirit into the hands of God, at the moment when the sun was about to set on the thirteenth day of the month of Epep of this fifth year (of the Indiction).
And we lifted up his holy coffin, and we took it into the holy chamber of the altar of the congregation of Tsentei,
and we made it ready for burial according to the instructions which he had given us,
and we passed the whole night in lamentation for him.
And afterwards we partook of the Holy Offering over him,
and we carried him away into the mountain to the place which he had made us dig for him that he might remain in our neighbourhood.
And we buried him on the fourteenth day of this same month Epep. In the Peace of God. Amen. Amen.
...
...
...
And I cast myself upon the ground
and made obeisance unto them,
but they raised me up
and kissed me.
And they remained in a state of great dignity (?), and they were like unto beings who had transferred themselves from another world in respect for the joy and comfort which they displayed towards me;
and they gathered fruit from the trees and placed it in my mouth.
And as for me my heart rejoiced because of the affection which they shewed towards me,
and I passed seven days with them eating of the fruit of the trees.
And I asked them, saying, 'Whence have ye come to this place? And of what region are ye natives?'
And they said unto me, ``O our brother, God hath sent thee unto us so that we may declare unto thee our whole manner of life.
For we are natives of a city of Egypt called Pemdje (Oxyrhynchus).
Our fathers were councillors (or, magistrates) of the city, and they sent us to the school there to have us educated;
and we were all in the same school together, and we were all of the same mind.
when we had finished our education in the school they sent us on to the college,
and when we had been thoroughly well taught there and had learned therein all the learning (?) and all the wisdom of this world, we wished to be instructed in the wisdom of God.
And it came to pass on a certain day that whilst we were talking together about these things a good resolution stirred in our inner man,
and we four rose up,
 and we set ourselves on the way to the desert, so that we might live therein quietly until we should see what the Lord had ordained for us.
And we took with us a few loaves of bread, sufficient for seven days.
And when we had come into the mountain, straightway an ecstasy fell upon us,
and a man, who was all light, laid hold of our hands
and brought us into this place.
And when we had come into this place we found a holy man of God, and the angel of the Lord put us in his hand,
and he taught us to be servants of God for a year of days.
And at the end of the year the holy and blessed old man died,
and we remained by ourselves in this place.
``Behold, O our lord brother, we declare unto thee by God that for sixty years we have not known the taste of bread, or of any other kind of food except the fruit of these trees whereon we live.
If we wish to see each other we come here every week to do so. We pass the whole night of the First Day of the week together, and after that each one departeth to perform his spiritual labours [for the rest of the week].''
And I said unto them, 'Where do ye receive the Eucharist?''
And they said unto me, 'We assemble here for that purpose, for an angel of God cometh hither every Sabbath, and he administereth unto us the Eucharist on the Sabbath and on the First Day of the week.'
And I stayed with them, and I rejoiced exceedingly.
[And they said unto me], 'On the seventh day the angel of the Lord will come, and he will administer the Eucharist to thee and to us together.
And the man who shall receive the Eucharist at the hand of that angel shall be cleansed from all sin, and the Adversary shall never have dominion over him.'
And whilst we were talking together I smelled a strong sweet smell, the like whereof I never smelled before.
And immediately the sweet smell reached us we rose up, and we stood on our feet, and we blessed God.
And afterwards the angel came,
and he administered unto us the Eucharist, the Body and Blood of the Lord.
And I became like unto those who sleep, because of the awesome sight which I saw.
And he blessed us,
and he went up into heaven, and we watched him with our eyes.
And when he had gone up they comforted me,
and said unto me, ``Be of good cheer, for thou shalt prevail, and thou shalt become a man of might;''
and straightway I became of good cheer, even as those who are under [the influence of] wine.
And we stood on our feet during the [eve of] the First Day of the week, and we prayed the whole night long until the morning.
And when the light appeared at dawn on the First Day of the week, behold, we smelled that exceedingly sweet smell again,
and we enjoyed it, and we rejoiced after the manner of those who are in another world.
And afterwards the angel came,
and he administered unto us the Eucharist, and he blessed each one of us, saying, ``Everlasting life shall be unto thee, and [the power of] prophecy which shall never be destroyed.''
And we all, with one mouth and with one accord, answered and said, ``Amen; so be it!''
And afterwards the angel turned to me,
and said unto me, ``Arise, and depart thou to Egypt, and tell the God-loving brethren the things which thou hast seen, so that they may emulate the life and conversation of the saints.''
And I entreated him to let me remain with them,
but he said unto me, 'The Lord doth not allot unto us the work which is imagined by the heart, but God giveth unto each man according to what he is able to bear.
Now, therefore, arise and depart, for that is what the Lord hath ordained for thee.'
And he blessed me,
and went up into the heavens in great glory.
And they brought a large number of plums,
and we ate them together,
and I came forth from them, and they accompanied me on my way for a distance of six miles.
And I entreated them, saying, ``Declare unto me your names,''
and they declared me their names, each one of them.
The name of the first was John,
of the second Andrew,
of the third Heraklamon,
and of the fourth Theophilus;
and they commanded me to declare their names unto the brethren, [so that] they might remember them [in their prayers].
And I on my part entreated them to keep my name in remembrance.
And we prayed and we kissed each other.
And I journeyed forth, and I grieved exceedingly;
nevertheless, because of the blessing which the holy men had bestowed upon me, I rejoiced.
And I came into Egypt after a journey of three days,
and having found certain God-loving brethren I rested with them for ten days,
and I described unto them what had happened unto me;
and they said unto me, ``Verily thou art worthy of a great reward.''
Now those brethren were lovers of God, and they contended strenuously in the ascetic life, and they were worshippers of God with their whole hearts; and their place of abode was Shiet (Scete).
And they made haste and they wrote down these things which they had heard from Apa Papnoute,
and they quickly put them in a book,
which they sent to Shiet,
where it was deposited in the church for the benefit of those who should hear it [read].
And they spoke about it, and it was the subject of meditation in the mouth of everyone.
And they glorified God, and blessed His saints, through the grace and love to man of our Lord Jesus the Christ, to Whom be glory, and His Good Father, and the Holy Spirit, for ever and ever!
Amen.
I, Victor, the least of all men, the deacon, the son of the blessed Mercurius, the deacon of [the church of] Saint Mercurius, the general-in-chief, of the city of Latopolis, wrote this book.
Remember me, O Lord, when Thou comest into Thy kingdom!
. . . by the zeal and care of our fathers and beloved brethren, Abba Abraham, the governor, and Abba Khael, the archdeacon, and the warden Zacharias, deacon and monk of the Monastery of Saint Mercurius, the general-in-chief, which is in the Mountain of Tbo (Edfu, or Utfu).
They made the book with [the proceeds of] their own labour,
and they deposited it in their monastery in order that [the brethren] may read therein, and that those who read therein, and those who hear it read with attention, may profit to the full thereby, and our Good Saviour and Saint Apa Onnophrios, the anchorite, may bless them, and all those who are assembled in their monastery, with the blessing of heaven, and the blessing of earth, in the most complete fulfilment.
May He give blessing, and fullness, and abundance, and lasting salvation in this Monastery.
May He deliver them from the wiles of the Devil and of evil-doing men,
and when they come forth from the body, according to what is ordained for every man, may they hear [the words], 'Well [done], servants good and faithful; since ye have been faithful in a few things, I will set you over many. Enter into the joy of thy Lord.'
 May they be worthy of an inheritance with all the saints. Amen. So be it!
His food consisted of bread and salt only.
And the Devil goaded him with carnal desire, for he wished to make him fall into fornication ;
but this noble Apa Victor vanquished him by means of prayers, and fasting, and by his Christian citizenship.
And his fellow noblemen were always making a mock of him, saying, 'Why dost thou not eat?
Why dost thou not drink?
Why dost thou not wear fine apparel and put on beautiful raiment?
Thou wilt die, and then others will consume thy possessions.'
But he was wont to make answer [unto them], saying, ' Apparel becometh moth-eaten,
gold and silver crumble away,
[and] the beauty of the body becometh destroyed in the tomb.'
And Apa Victor was wont to go into his chamber and to pray unto God in the following manner : ' O Lord, hearken unto me!
(O) Lord Jesus the Christ, Thou knowest the speech of heresy, and (Thou knowest) whether I love Thee or not.
O my Lord Jesus the Christ, permit Thou not the love of women to rise up in my heart, lest Satan find a place of abode in my heart, and lest mine enemies rejoice over me, and lest Thou Thyself become wroth with me, and say unto me in the day of the Judgement of Truth (when) I come into Thy hands, 'Depart thou from Me.'
But let Thy lovingkindness bear patiently with me, and do Thou not remove Thyself from me.
Glory be unto Thee, O Father, Who art in the Son, and unto Thee, O Son, Who art in the Father, and unto Thee, O Holy Spirit, for ever, and ever, and ever! Amen.'
Then Romanus the general said unto Apa Victor, his son, 'My son Victor, it is now thy turn to worship the gods of the Emperor, in whose honour the whole city is keeping this day a feast, especially Apollo, the greatest of the gods.'
And Apa Victor looked into the face of his father, saying, 'O my father, hath this foolishness obtained such a hold upon thee this day as to make thee forsake the God of heaven for the sake of the glory that is vanity?
Remember, therefore, that which our Lord Jesus saith in the Gospel, 'Whosoever denieth Me before men, him will I Myself deny before My Father, Who is in the heavens, and before His holy angels.
Do not therefore deny Him, O my father, that He may not deny thee.
For God gave a commandment unto Moses, saying, 'Speak thou unto the children of Israel, saying, Be ye not like unto the nations who worship creatures instead of Him that created (them).
And lift ye not up your eyes to the heavens, to worship the sun, and the moon, and the stars, when ye see them, and the feathered fowl of the heavens, and the four-footed creatures of the earth, for in that day I will destroy you, saith the Lord,'
Now therefore, O my father, be not thou like unto them, lest God destroy thee.
For it would be better for thee that thou hadst never been born than that, having been born, thou shouldst live and make thyself a man without God.'
And whilst Apa Victor was saying these words all the soldiers of the army were looking on him and on his father.
Then Romanus said, | 'O my son Victor, hearken unto me, and do thou offer up sacrifice, and let us bring to an end our trouble in this place.
Now I have never given thee an occasion to grieve from thy childhood up.
Remember, O my son Victor, that I am seeking after thy bride,
and I am going to take her for thee to wife in the very next month which is coming.
Apa Victor said unto his father, 'I have not asked thee for a bride or for a gift, but I am grieving exceedingly for thee, for thou hast denied the Saviour,
In very truth, O my father, thou art a miserable man,
for the works which thou art doing God hateth.
Now woe and confusion shall come upon thee, because David said, He who is in a battle, and he who carrieth away stuff (or, spoil), the same share appertaineth to both alike.
Moreover, O my father, the man who committeth sin, and the man who is of the same opinion as the man who committeth it, the same disgrace appertaineth to both alike.
I beg thee therefore, by every means, do not this thing, my father.
Get thee away from this sin which leadeth unto death.
Look thou into the Gospel of the Lord, and see that whilst the Jews were crying out, Crucify Jesus, Pilate the Governor took water, and washed his hands
and made himself free from the liability (for His death) among the high priests and the Jews,
and he delivered his soul from death.
And his father was wroth with indignation,
and he swore an oath, saying, ' By Apollo, the greatest of the gods, I will deliver thee over to the Emperor (so that) He may destroy thee.
Dost thou not know that I am well acquainted with the matter wherewith thou art occupied? Thou hast learned to work magic in this Name of Jesus.
Think not, however, O Victor, that he will be able to help thee.
for veFor very many men of thy kind have died for His sake,
and they have been stripped of their worldly goods and of their estates and possessions.
Perhaps thou art grief-stricken because I have not taken for thee to wife thy bride
And Apa Victor answered and said, 'My father, the fruit of the Devil hath taken deep root in thee'
Romanus said unto Apa Victor, 'Knowest thou not, O miserable one, that when a man is disobedient unto his father they put him to death?'
Apa Victor said unto his father, 'Yesterday thou didst worship God and I was thy son; but today I am not thy son, because thou hast made thyself disobedient unto God,
 and thou dost worship idols.'
Truly did Paul the scribe say, 'In the case of a man who is a heretic, if after thou hast admonished him once or twice, and he doth not hearken unto thee, let him alone, for thou knowest that his portion is not with God.'
For this reason thou art not my father.
Roman us said unto him, 'Hearken unto me, O my son Victor.
Do not throw away and waste thine early manhood. And do not disgrace thyself in the midst of the imperial palace, and before the whole of the Emperor's army.
I myself shall be put to shame because of thee, and shall be disgraced before the Emperor and his servants, for thou art setting at naught the law of the Emperors, and thou art shewing thyself to be an ill-educated young man among thy companions. And they will take away from thee thy rations, and the Emperor will be angered because of thee.
But, if thou wilt hearken unto me, I will make an appeal to the Emperor on thy behalf, and he will make thee a general, and thou shalt be a man of dignity and honour in the palace of the Emperor.
Be thou not disobedient to me, O my son.
Dost thou not know that I and thy mother have no other son except thee?
I swear by the health of Apollo that if thy mother were to hear that thy body hath troubled thee during the last few days, she would be able neither to eat, nor to drink, and she would grieve sorely (about) thee.
O my son Victor, I swear by mine own health, that on the day whereon thou wast born to me I made an offering of twenty centenarii of gold to the temple of Apollo. I was bound, deaf,
On the third day after thou wast born to me, I betrothed the daughter of Basileides to thee to wife.
And therefore I swear by thine own health, O my son Victor, that if thou wilt worship the glorious gods of the Emperor, I will make a gift unto thee of another thirty centenarii of gold, in addition to the other things which I have determined to give unto thee.'
Then Basileides and Euaios went to Apa Victor, and they said unto him, ' Verily we come to entreat thee this day as a free man.
Wilt thou then make thyself to be as it were a slave before us?
Why hath thine heart turned its gaze aside in this manner ?
And why hast thou not hearkened to thy father who hath made supplication to thee?
Do not put our hearts to shame, who bow humbly before thee.'
And Apa Vietor became wroth,
and he cried out, saying, ' O God, look Thou with Thine eyes, and with Thine ears hear. As I wish to live, even so do I wish that everyone else may have life with me also.
I have no feeling of envy (or, jealousy) in me.
Behold Thou then, O God, the things which they are doing unto me, and see how they even dare to say unto me, 'Take thou thirty centenarii of gold, and deny Jesus in the midst of this multitude.'
Do they not think that I myself am Judas who betrayed (or, gave away) his Lord for thirty pieces of silver, for which reason he inherited the outer darkness for ever?
 I swear by the prayers of the saints, for I am not worthy to take an oath by the name of God, that if thou wouldst give unto me the whole world, and the kingdom of Diocletian, and his possessions, and his gods of gold and of silver, which he hath made I would not offer up sacrifice.
For it is written, 'If thou shalt gain the whole world, and lose thy soul, what is the profit (to thee)?'
Dost thou not know know that for the last twelve years I have fasted the whole week through, from Sabbath to Sabbath,
and that I have never once washed in a bath?
And when Romanus had heard these things from his son Victor, he said, ' I swear by Apollo that I will deliver thee into the hands of the Emperor, and he shall destroy thee.
Thou dost not know what I know well, that thou art treating the law with contempt; for it is written, 'When a son is disobedient to his father they shall slay him.''
And Apa Victor said unto his father, 'Behold, that which is written is fulfilled this day, 'A father shall deliver his son over to death.'
If thou shalt deliver me over (to death), O my father, there existeth One Who will help me.
Shall not I reward thee with the reward of my Lord?
For when, the Jews were standing before Him, and crying out 'Crucify Him', and were buffeting Him, He did not reward them with evil in place of evil, but He shewed compassion upon them.
And moreover He is shewing mercy and longsuffering towards all this multitude this day, and upon this lawless king I who is carrying out these evil designs in the midst of this city.
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
And the Devil filled the heart of the father of Apa Victor, and he made him to deliver Apa Victor over into the hands of Diocletian the Emperor
And when the Emperor had looked into the face of Apa Victor, he said unto him
O thou Victor, why hast thou not hearkened to thy father, and worshiped my gods?
Is it possible that thou dost not know that I have absolute power over thee?
And Apa Victor tore off his golden chain, and removed the insignia of his rank which he had on him, and he threw them in the face of Diocletian, saying,
Indeed I am in no way a soldier, and I will not wear the badge of an emperor who is mortal, for I wear the badge of the Emperor who is in the heavens.
For it is written in the book of the Christians,
It is not possible for you to perform the service of two master; (ye must) either (serve God or mammon,
And again, It is not possible for you to eat at the table of the lord, and at the table of the demons.
Now therefore, I will serve the God of heaven, and I will not serve mammon, that is to say, thee, Emperor therefore, I will serve the God of heaven
And the Emperor said unto Apa Victor
How dost thou dare to insult me in this fashion?
Dost thou think that there are no instruments of punishment and torture in the prison-house wherewith I can have thee punished?
Have I not already commanded (or, announced to) thee, saying I not already commanded (or, announced to) thee, saying,
Never let me hear this name of Jesus (issue) from thy mouth?
If it were not that I should inflict shame on thy father I would not permit thee to utter one word in my presence.
Is it possible that thou hast never heard that an Emperor like unto myself gave orders to a governor
who put to death thy Lord Jesus, in whom thou puttest thy confidence? his king was Herod, who gave orders to Pilate and Pilate put Him to death.
Now, if it was a mere governor who slew Jesus thy God, how much more is it possible for me, an Emperor, to destroy this name of Jesus from under heaven, and every one who worshippeth Him?
Now, therefore, O 'Victor, come, hearken to thy father, and do thou offer up sacrifice to the gods.
 If, however, thou wilt not do so, I will banish thee, and they shall put thee to death.
And Romanus turned towards his son Apa Victor and said unto him
 Art thou still not persuaded to pay worship unto the gods of the Emperor?
And Apa Victor said unto his father
If Diocletian be thy god, (good and well); but he is no god of mine, for my Lord is Jesus the Christ.
And his father was exceedingly wroth, and he commanded them to bind his son's arms behind him, and to carry him outside the city, and to spear him there (until) he died.
And they tied the arms of this noble Apa Victor behind him, and they fastened a gag in his mouth so that they might carry him outside (the city) to destroy him; and when he was coming out soldiers accompanied him.
And the Devil took the form of a soldier, and he made himself visible to Victor, and he said unto him
Victor, where wilt thou fulfill this evil course of action?
By these acts of thine thou art abandoning thy father to grief.
Thou thinkest that thy father hateth thee. This is certainly not so, for thy father loveth thee exceedingly.
Now, therefore, hearken thou unto me, and let me tell thy father that thou hast repented, and he will cease to be angry with thee.
Do not, then, do not, I say, be disobedient unto him.
Consider Isaac, the son of Abraham, who shewed no disobedience to his father when he saw the knife of slaughter which was to kill him coming down upon him.
Now, therefore, do not make thy father to grieve, otherwise thou wilt fall under the curse of Ham, who was under the curse of his father, because he looked upon his father's nakedness.
Now, therefore, do not shew disobedience to thy father, and then I will petition the Emperor, and he will make thee a general.
And Apa Victor said unto the Devil
I have not set my mind upon the possession of the rank of general in this world, but upon the kingdom of my Lord Jesus the Christ.
And when these words had been said (by him) they went in and told the Emperor that Romanus had passed sentence of death upon his son, Apa Victor, and that his head was to be cut off, (because) he had sinned against the Emperor and his gods.
And Diocletian sent two (of his) bodyguards so that they might seize him, and bring him to him.
And the Emperor said unto his father
I know this day that thou carest neither for (thy) wife nor (thy) son as much as thou carest for me and my gods, and that thou hast gone so far as to deliver over to death thine only son for my sake. But  hearken unto me and unto the things which I will declare
Hearken unto me
Peradventure this impostor hath led his heart astray. I will banish him to Rakote, and let him he there in prison until he dieth
And Apa Victor was exceedingly wroth, and he said unto the emperor
thou stupid and senseless Emperor this matter which thou seekest to effect is good, (for) thou wilt make thyself a strangers unto us, and we shall become strangers unto thee.
And the greater part of thine army shall hale thee, and God shall he angry with thee, and He shall send His wrath upon thee, and shall destroy thy kingdom
And the Emperor was wroth, and he commanded immediately that (his servants) should reduce his supply of food, hut he did not cut off his rations altogether, and the Emperor allowed him sufficient food to keep him alive lest he should die of hunger.
And he caused him to be deprived of his rank of count.
And he made them to fasten Apa Victor's hands behind him
and he tied him to the tail of a horse
and shaved the crown of his head
and he suspended a bell from his neck
and four soldiers filled their hands with palm branches and beat him therewith, and they dragged him naked round about through all the city, and a herald went before him crying out
These things are done unto this man because he will not offer up sacrifice to the gods of the Emperor
and they went through every part of the city with him.
And on the new moon of Parmoute, the first day of the month of the beginning of the year, according to the computation of the Romans
Diocletian took a sheet of parchment, and wrote on it these words
I, Diocletian, who am the Lord of all the World, write unto Armenius, the Count of Rakote, that so soon as this man Victor, who is banished, is brought unto thee
thou shalt examine him carefully three times
and slialt afterwards drive him to the baths, and burn him.
And straightway they delivered him over into the hands of four soldiers in order that they might take him to Rakote.
There was (an iron) collar round his neck, there was a gag in his mouth, there was fettering iron about his feet, and he was naked, and there were iron casings about his legs, and the soldiers drove him along with blows.
And Apa Victor said unto the soldiers who were in charge of him, ' My brethren, I pray you to cease to treat me with such harshness and  cruelty, and to vex me so seriously
What is the evil thing which I have done unto you, that ye should rejoice over me with such keen pleasure?
I have never done any injury to you, and I have never committed an act of injustice against you.
If the Lord will He can prepare my way of escape, not only from you, but from everybody.
And when his mother had seen him, she was greatly disturbed within herself, and she rose up on her throne, and she said
Is it thou, O my son Victor, thou light of mine eyes?
And when she saw that he was naked, and that he was wearing iron fetters on his hands and on his feet, she said unto him
 Why art thou in this state, O my son Victor?
Truly my soul is greatly disturbed when I see thee in this state.
Art thou mad? Could not the Emperor have adjudged thee (to pay) money, rather than treat thee in this way?
And Apa Victor said unto his mother
Weep thou, my mother, for they are going to remove the name of Victor from thy house this day.
Now, therefore, hearken thou unto me, my mother, and I will declare in thine ears my words which are sweet.
Before every tiling do thou fear God, and do thou glorify His saints.
Keep holy His sabbaths.
Observe the times of fastings.
Neglect neither the widows nor the orphans, for from this day forward I myself shall be an orphan, without father and without mother, so that the lovingkindness which thou shewest in this world will God also shew to some one else.
May lie transfer it to me myself in that other world which I am about to enter, for there is nothing greater than love (i, e. charity).
Visit those who are sick.
Now, therefore, O my mother, I know of a certainty that I shall never have a sight of thee again after this present sight, even if I live. If thou hearest that I have died, seek after my body and bring it to this place.
Make not thyself like I unto my father who hateth (his) son, but be thou compassionate. And do thou ascribe glory unto God by day and by night, so that He may shew compassion unto thee in the days of necessity.
THE INSTRUCTIONS WHICH OUR HOLY FATHER, HE WHO WAS GLORIOUS IN EVERYTHING, THE ARCHIMANDRITE, PRONOUNCED CONCERNING A BROTHER WHO, IN THE TIME OE APA EBONH, WAS STIRRED TO WRATH AGAINST A CERTAIN MAN WHOM HE HAD BROUGHT TO TABENNfiSE.i HE SPAKE THESE WORDS TO HIM, AND THE OTHER FATHERS (WHO WERE) OLD MEN WERE THERE, AND THEY REJOICED EXCEEDINGLY. IN THE PEACE OF GOD!
MAY HIS HOLY BLESSING AND THE BLESSINGS OF ALL THE SAINTS COME UPON US, AND MAY WE ALL BE SAVED! AMEN.
My son, listen. Make thyself wise, and receive the instruction of truth (?).
There are two ways (which thou canst follow).
 Either make thyself independent, (or) hearken unto (i. e. obey) God as did Abraham, who forsook his [native] land, and made himself an exile, and lived in a tent with Isaac in the land of promise as a stranger.
My son, emulate the lives of the saints, and follow closely their virtues in thy life and conversation.
Be thou then long-suffering, so that thou mayest be numbered among the company of the saints 'while you believe that you will receive an imperishable crown
Thoughts? Bear them with long-suffering (or, patience) until God shall give thee rest.
Fasting? Bear it continually with patient endurance.
Prayer? Let it be without ceasing in thy habitation between thee and God.
(Let thy) heart be at one with thy brother.
(Let) virginity be in all thy members,
(let) virginity be in thy thoughts (or, mind)
For gladness goeth with him that is humble, and thou shalt be satisfied with whatsoever thy soul desireth.
For the ways of God are with him that is lowly of heart, and with the humble man.
My son, I command thee to watch and to be sober, and to understand what are the things which lie in wait for thee.
The spirit of sloth and a not unbelieving attitude of mind walk together.
The spirit of lying and the works and the words which are not deceitful walk together.
The spirit of the love of money, and non-trafficking, and not swearing false oaths, and works which are not evil, and envy walk together.
The spirit of vanity and non-greediness (?) walk together.
The spirit of fornication and impurity walk together.
Woe be to that miserable soul wherein these things take up their abode, and make themselves masters of it in such a manner that they drive it away from God
for it getteth out of its own control, and it is tossed about on this side and on that until it arriveth in the Tartarus of Amente.
My son, hearken unto me. Be not thou careless
Give no sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eyelids, so that thou mayest be able to escape like a goat from those who would shear it.
For, O my son, all the spirits from my youth up have on many occasions made me weak,
I came into the desert they used to afflict me to such a degree that my heart failed me, and I thought that there was not strength enough in me to stand up against the threat of the Serpent.
For he used to persecute me on every side
My son, do not use words of abuse to any man, lest peradventure thou mayest see some one paying (the man) honour, and must say, 'This one hath ended (his trouble), he receiveth refreshing.'
Take thou good heed to guard thyself against a thought of this kind, for it is exceedingly; and God I hateth him that payeth Him honour, if he be one who hateth his brother.
And he who shall say concerning himself, 'I am something,' is nothing at all, and he only deceiveth himself; is there any one who can help him?
He who is arrogant, and who maketh his heart like unto the heart of God, saying,
There is no one who can be compared with me,' let him hear now his Creator, saying, 'Thou shalt go down into Amente. They shall cast thee down with the dead, the worms shall gnaw pieces from thy body, and the Worm shall envelop thee.'
The man who hath gotten himself humility judgeth himself, saying,
 My sins are greater than those of every other man' he judgeth no man in any way whatsoever, and he abuseth no man.
Who art thou that thou shouldst judge a slave who doth not belong unto thee ?
My son, keep watch over thyself, and never abuse any man.
Taste thou all the virtues, and guard thou them carefully.
If thou art a stranger, keep to thyself. Rush not into the company of men, and thou shalt not mingle with their works.
Remember Habakkuk in Judea, and Daniel in Chaldea,
though there was a difference between them—for one used to rule in the palace—especially the case of Daniel; when he was down in the pit (and was intended) to become food for the wild beasts,
He prepared a meal for him.
Remember Elijah in the desert, and the widow in Zarephath, who notwithstanding the scourge of famine and the pressure of hunger which weighed heavily upon her, and the helplessness of her old age, never lost heart,
but she contended boldly, and prevailed and obtained the promise of God, and her house enjoyed abundance during the time of the famine.
The giving of bread either in the time of abundance or in (the time of) poverty is not power if thou be once blameworthy through want.
For it is written concerning the saints, 'They suffer want, they are afflicted, they endure tribulation,
but they boast themselves in their troubles.'
If thou dost a contend in patience in the strife of the Scriptures, no servitude whatsoever shall come upon thee, according to that which is, written,
'Do not let yourselves be deceived with eating, and drinking, or with the share at the festival, or with new moons, or with sabbaths, which shall be a covering for the things that take place.'
Meditate thou always on the words of God, endure sufferings patiently, and in everything give thanks.
Flee thou from before the honour of men. Love thou him that revileth thee, in the fear of God.
When thou art seated among the brethren, do not laugh at even the smallest word of scurrility (which thou mayest hear).
Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego disregarded the jeering of Nebuchadnezzar, and for this reason he was unable to compel them (to worship) by the songs and music of his instruments neither was he able to trick them by meals at his table.
And for this reason the flames of fire [of the furnace] which rose up to a height of forty-nine cubits were extinguished. And these men did not go over to the perverse (or, crooked),
but they were upright before Him that is upright, that is to say, God; and for this reason He made them chiefs over their enemies.
And again, Daniel did not hearken unto the conversation of the Chaldeans, which was evil, and for this reason he became a chosen vessel of great value.
And (the lions) fell down, and watched him with intelligent understanding, and he shut the mouths of the savage lions.
Now therefore, O my son, if thou wilt set God before thee as thy hope, He will become a helper unto thee in the hour of thy strife;
for it is right for him that setteth out to go to God to believe that He is, and that this wage (i.e. reward, or prize) shall be to those who seek Him.
These words have been written down for us in order that we may believe in God, and that we, from the least among us even to the greatest, may strive in the contest with fastings, and with prayers, and with other kinds of service, until the spittle drieth in thy mouth through fasting.
And God will not be unmindful of this, but thou shalt find all these again in the hour of thy necessity.
Only do thou humble thyself in everything.
Set thy word behind thee, if thou wouldst have understanding of everything in peace.
man, what wilt thou do in Babylon? Thou wilt commit some disgraceful act in (that) strange land, because thou hast never been put to the test, and thou wilt cast God away from thee willingly.
For this reason, O my brother, do not abandon thy heart.
Thou mayest perhaps forget for a short time
but thine enemies will never sleep, neither will they ever forget, either by night or by day, and they will attribute craft to thee.
For this reason run not thou after greatness, lest thou be humiliated, and thine enemies rejoice over thee;
run after humility, for he that exalteth himself shall be brought low, and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted.
If thou art unable to make thyself independent, cling thou unto some one who doth work in the Gospel of the Christ, and thou shalt go forward with him.
Or do thou obey thyself, or submit thyself, to one who doth obey. Or make thyself to become strong, so that men may call thee Elias, or do thou obey a strong man, so that men may call thee Elisha;
If thou wishest to live in the desert, behold, all the prophets (have done so) before thee;
make thyself like unto them. They spread themselves about in the deserts, and in the ravines of the hills, and in the caverns of the earth, they suffered privations, and they endured tribulations, and afflictions, and pains.
Again He saith, 'The shadows of those who were martyred (?) and the spirlt(s) of the men who endured trial, and suffered tribulation, shall bless Thee.
Moreover, when the thief uttered one word on the cross, God forgave him his sins, and took him into Paradise.
My son, flee thou from the desire of lust, for that it is which produceth the understanding of wickedness.
It will not permit a man to know the mystery of God,
and it will make thee a stranger to the language of the Spirit;
and it will not permit thee to bear the Cross of the Christ,
and it will not permit the heart to breathe the blessings of God.
Keep thou watch against the relaxation of the viscera, which shall make thee a stranger unto the good things of Paradise.
Keep thou watch against the pollution of thy body, which shall provoke to wrath God and His angels.
My son, turn thou to God ; thou shalt love Him, thou shalt flee from the Enemy, whom thou shalt hate, so that the graces of God may be with thee, and thou shalt inherit, as did Judah, the son of Jacob.
My son, be thou long-suffering in everything, for it is written, 'Make haste to make thyself a chosen one of God, a workman who hath no need to be ashamed.'
Set out on thy way to God after the manner of one who soweth and reapeth, and thou shalt enter into thy treasure-house (or, granary) of the good things of God.
Do not turn away the face like the hypocrites, but treat with decision the wishes of thy heart; work for God, and work for thine own salvation.
If the passion of the love of money attack thee, and envy, or hatred, or any one of the other passions, enter into thee, take thou to thyself the heart of the lion, take thou to thyself the heart of the mighty warrior, and do battle with them, and destroy them like Sihon, and Og, and all the kings of the Amorites;
for the beloved Son, the Only-begotten, the King Jesus, fighteth for thee, and thou shalt inherit the city of the enemy.
Only cast out from thyself every kind of pride, and thou shalt be strong.
And observe. When Joshua, (the son) of Nun was bold (or strong), God gave his enemies into his hand.
If thou become timid of heart thou makest thyself a stranger to the law of God.
Timidity of heart filleth thee with excuses for sloth, and unbelief, and carelessness, until thou art destroyed.
Be lion-hearted I Cry out, saying, 'Who shall separate us from the love of God? If thou sayest, ' My outer (man) will perish, (it may be true), but thine inner man will become renewed day by day.
If thou livest in the desert fight by means of prayers, and fastings, and afflictions;
if thou livest among men, be thou wise as the serpents, and harmless as these doves (about) us.
If a man hath struck thee a blow, bear it at his hands, and rejoice ; set thy hope in God, and He will do what is good for thee.
And again He said, 'Blessed are ye when men heap curses on you, and persecute you, and revile your names as (those of) evildoer(s).'
Behold our Fathers Barnabas and Paul, when honour was paid to them they rent their garments, and they wept, hating the glory of men.
And Peter himself, and John, when they had been beaten in the Synagogue came out rejoicing, because they had been held to be worthy of being beaten for the sake of the Holy Name of the Lord, (for) they were hoping for the honour of heaven.
O my son, do thou flee the comfort which is in this world in order that thou mayest enjoy thyself in the world which is to come.
Be not careless, and do not let day after day pass unheeding, or (vices) will overtake thee before thou knowest (it), and thou wilt come into danger wherefrom thou canst not escape, and these foul-faced things will surround thee, and seize thee, and carry thee away with insolent boldness, and they will cast thee into their place of darkness, which is filled with fear and tribulation.
Grieve not if any man insult thee before men, but grieve and sigh when thou committest a sin,
 for this is the true disgrace for thee, to go to the stripes of thy sin.
I command thee, with the greatest earnestness, to hate the glory which is vain.
The armour of the Devil is empty praise, and it was in this way that he led astray Eve.
He said unto her, 'Eat of the tree, for it will open your eyes, and ye shall become like the gods.'
She hearkened and she thought that it was true ; she fled from the glory which was divine,
and there was taken away from her (the glory) of humanity.
And when thou pursuest the glory which is vain, it maketh thee a stranger to the glory of God.
Now therefore, when honour is paid unto thee, abase thy heart thyself, and give glory to God;
and when they revile thee, give glory to God likewise, and give thanks unto Him because thou art held to be worthy of the portion of His Son and His saints.
If they called thy Lord 'The Impostor', and the Prophets vile men', and the others ' madmen ', behold, how much more will they call us by these names who are dust and ashes?
Make unto thyself simplicity (or, innocence). Be thou like unto the simple lambs about us, which when their wool is shorn from them say nothing.
Go not from one place to another, saying, 'I shall find God in this place or in that.'
Know, O my son, that God is in thine interior, so that He may make thee to remain in the law and commandments of God.
Behold, the thief upon the cross went into Paradise.
Behold, Judas himself in the midst of the Apostles betrayed his Lord.
Behold Rahab and her fornication!
She is numbered among the saints.
Behold, Eve, who was deceived, is in Paradise.
Behold, Job on the dung-heap is compared with his God.
Behold, Adam, who transgressed the commandment, is in Paradise.
Behold, the angels of heaven were taken into the abyss (?).
Behold, Elijah and Enoch were taken into the kingdom of the heavens with all glory.
Seek after God, seek ye His face at all times.
Seek thou Him as did Abraham, who obeyed God and offered up his son as a sacrifice unto God,
Who called him My Companion'.
Seek Him like Joseph, who contended against pollution, and at length became king over his enemies.
Seek Him like Moses, who followed his God,
and He made him a lawgiver, and taught him concerning His likeness.
Daniel sought Him, and He taught him great mysteries,
and delivered him from the mouths of the lions.
The Three Holy Men sought Him, and found Him in the furnace of fire.
Job took refuge with Him, and He healed him of his wounds.
Susannah sought Him, and He delivered her out of the hand of the lawless men.
Judith sought Him, and she found Him in the tent of Holophernes.
All these sought Him, and He delivered them, (and) He delivered others also.
As for thee, O my son, how long wilt thou be careless?
What is the limit (?) of thy carelessness?
What it was last year, even so is it this year;
and what it was yesterday, even so is it to-day.
And again, know thou the city of the Christ, and give glory unto Him, because He died for thee.
If it should happen that a brother uttereth some word concerning thee, why shouldst thou become angry, and behave towards him like a wild beast?
And why dost thou not remember that the Christ died for thee?
At the moment when thine enemy, that is to say, the Devil, whispereth unto thee, thou dost incline thine ear to him, and he poureth into it stinkingness, and thou openest thy heart, and dost swallow the venom which he poureth into thee.
O my son, take thou good heed to the words of the wise man Paul, and to that which he spake, saying, 'There are bonds and tribulations awaiting me in Jerusalem,
but I do not value my soul in the very least so that I may complete my course.
And I am ready to die in Jerusalem for the Name of my Lord Jesus, the Christ.'
For neither sufferings nor temptation can prevent the saints from going to the Lord.
Be thou of good cheer then, play the man; what hast thou, to do with the sluggishness of the Devil?
He fleeth before the patient endurance of the saints.
O my son, why dost thou flee from Adonai, the Lord of Sabaoth?
Why dost thou flee to the captivity of the Chaldeans?
Why dost thou give thy heart to eat with the devils?
Guard thou thyself, O my son, from fornication.
Destroy not the member of the Christ.
Do not hearken to the devils, and make the member of the Christ into the member of a whore.
Remember the tribulations and the punishments.
O my son, flee thou to the feet of God, for it is He Who hath created thee, and He suffered for thee.
I gave My back to the stripes of the whips, and My cheeks to the buffetings of insult; I did not turn away My Face from the shame and the spitting.'
O man, the road to Egypt is not for thee, and it is not for thee to make thyself drink water from this Geon (i. e. Nile) which ;is stirred up (i. e. muddy).
These thoughts which are muddy also are not for thee.
Bestir thyself until these sufferings depart (?) from thee.
Moreover, turn thyself, weep for thy sins.
For it is written, ' If ye set yourselves to consider your sins which are in the soul, a seed of a great plant shall appear.'
Therefore thou seest, O man, that transgression is an evil thing, and that sin is wont to produce a multitude of sufferings and punishment.
Do not forsake the Church, which is, as it were, a widow.'
Now when I had heard these words, and when the clergy cried out to me in (my abode),
 I came forth, and I followed them, and I cast all my care upon Jesus, because nothing whatsoever can happen without (the consent of) God.
Now, therefore, ye must know, O my beloved, that that which I say unto you is true, and that also which the wise man Paul said, 'Let not each one take for himself honour, but let it be brought upon him through God.
When Aaron became high priest, it was not he who glorified himself, but He Who spake with him, saying, 'Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedek' And thus also was it in the case of the Christ, [for God said unto Him], ' This day have I begotten thee
In this wise did Apa Pisentius take his seat upon the episcopal throne with a perfect (heart). And God gave grace unto his face, even as to Joseph.
And no man dared to look into his face without being afraid of the fear of God which rested with him.
Who could take into account the number of the acts of kindness and charity which he did to the poor, and not only to the needy folk of his own province, but also to those who came to him from a distance?
He used to receive them himself, and give unto them whatsoever they asked at his hands.
And ye must know, moreover, that the praises which have been bestowed upon him are far too few, even for the early days of his episcopate, when he began to do acts of charity in every town and village (from Coptos) to Souan (Syene).
The things (i.e. the offerings), which were brought unto him year by year according to the Canons of the Apostles, he was wont to send secretly to certain men who were fearers of God in the various cities, and in the various villages, and they used to distribute it among the poor in the season
Now after a long time during which our holy Father Apa Pisentius had governed his flock with exceedingly great care, he dispatched (copies) of a letter to all the people who were in the province of Kebt (Coptos), and rebuked them, saying, Cease ye to do these great and grievous sins, concerning which we have been informed,
lest peradventure God shall become wroth with you, and shall deliver you over into the hands of the Barbarians who shall afflict you.'
And moreover, he wrote also in that letter, saying, ' Unless ye repent quickly, God shall bring that nation upon you without delay.
And again, after (this he wrote), 'Except ye be instructed, that nation shall not cease to raise up wrath against you.
(It is) a nation fierce of visage and cruel, and shameless in respect of its face; it shall neither spare, nor have compassion on old man or youth;
it shall afflict you with sufferings which shall be as grievous as the plagues of Pharaoh of old, until at length he drove them into the abysses of the sea, thinking to destroy (them) openly.
Therefore let repentance remain with you in your habitations at all times, so that it may be in your hearts, and let fasting increase in your mouth at all times.
For charity shall boast itself over judgement, according to the word of James, the wise man of the Apostles.'
For the third angel in the salvation of God is the Angel of Charity.
For charity shall deliver a man from death, and it will not permit him to go into the darkness.
And moreover, it is very much better to perform acts of charity than to gather in gold.
And thou shalt shew compassion unto him that is in debt to thee.
Let not thine eye be envious of thee whilst thou doest deeds of charity and righteousness.
And moreover, it is better to give a very little with lovingkindness and righteousness than to give a great deal with violence.
And do not thou turn thy face away from any poor man, and God shall not turn away His face from thee.
And again, in respect of the little which one may owe thee, be not afraid to give it in alms, even as the holy man Tobit said.
And consider the case of that rich man who despised Lazarus the poor man, and what was done unto him in the matter of punishment, and how he answered and said in anguish of heart,
 'My father Abraham, let them send Lazarus, and let him dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue therewith, for I am tortured in this fire.' And what he heard was it not words of rebuke?
For Abraham said unto him, 'My son, remember that during thy lifetime thou didst receive thy good things, and Lazarus the things which were bad.'
And now to him do they shew consolation in this place, whilst as for thee, they inflict tortures on thee for thy charity, for they will be as merciful to thee as thou hast been to the poor.
Thou didst feed thyself on young and tender flesh (?), and on small birds, and on other creatures, thou didst eat by thyself the tender plants of the earth, thou didst drink undiluted wine in glasses insatiably and without consideration for any other man.
And as concerning' the man whom thou didst forget, and to whom thou didst shew no charity with that which was thine,
 if there by chance remained to him the smallest amount of any possession, thou wast in the habit of demanding- it from him unjustly.
If thou wouldst not give unto him of the things which were thine own, at least thou mightest have been kind to him, and watched and seen that justice was done to him; thou shouldst not have weighed him down with thine injustice.
For thou knowest that thou and the poor man were made of one and the same kind of clay.
Do not give him cause to grieve, and God will not give thee cause to grieve.
There is a place of judgement wherein each man - shall be judged according to what he hath done, whether it be good, or whether it be evil.'
Behold, these are the things which the God-loving Father Apa Pisentius wrote on many occasions to all the people.
Now how is it possible for us to beautify our encomium of the holy man, except by means of his own mouth?
But let us invoke him, so that he may minister unto us in respect of the remainder of the things which it is seemly for us to narrate in this encomium, according to the measure of our inability.
We are wholly unable to attain to the heights of thy virtue, O thou good ascetic, who art adorned with the virtues of the Holy Spirit, [thou doer of] all the righteous precepts and commandments which are full of life.
Verily if every part of me was to become a tongue I should not be able to do honour to thee in a manner suitable to the ten thousands of virtues which thou dost possess ; and moreover, as for the mite which we are able to cast into the treasury, it is thy grace alone which hath prepared it for us.
For we know well that thou hast no need of our feeble tongue to utter these few words of encomium, because thy citizenship is in the heavens, according to the words of the tongue of sweet odour, that is to say, Paul, (who said), 'As for us, our citizenship is in heaven, the place for which we wait'.
Nevertheless, let us declare a few things concerning the holy man, to the glory of God.
Now it came to pass that at the time when God brought the heathen, that is to say, the Persians, upon us, for our sins, Apa Pisentius departed to the mountain of Djeme, and hid himself in that place because of the Persians.
And my father answered and said unto me, God will not forsake us, O my son, but He will minister unto all our wants.
For He said. Take no care for the morrow, for the morrow will take care for itself.
And again, at the time when Elijah the Tishbite was in the desert, the ravens brought bread unto him every day in the early morning, and again at the time of evening.
And when he had laid himself down and slept under the tree which is called 'rathmen', and had risen up, he found there upon it a loaf of bread and a vessel of water.
And an angel said unto him, 'Arise, eat bread, drink water.'
And Elijah ate the bread, and drank the water, and he journeyed on that road for forty days and forty nights,
Then I answered him, saying, ' I did fall down, and I did go mad, and this is the truth, when thou didst depart into the desert
but now thou hast returned to me once more, and I perceive that thy face is full of joy, and that bright light goeth forth from it, even as from the face of Moses, the Lawgiver,
the natural condition of my mind hath returned to me, and I cease to thirst
And he answered and said unto me, 'He Who supplieth with food the hawks (?) which neither sow nor reap, nor gather grain into garners, He, I say, it is Who hath supplied us with these waters whereof we were in need.
For for him who casteth his care upon Jesus will Jesus care in every place, and He will serve him.'
Therefore, O my beloved, ye must know that wheresoever a man goeth, all his hope must be (set upon) Jesus. And he must remember that which is written in (the Book of) Jeremiah the Prophet, 'Cursed is he whose hope is placed upon man,
but blessed is the man who hath set his heart upon God, and God shall become unto him a hope.
He shall become like a tree which is planted by the waters, and his roots shall not perish for lack of moisture.'
What shall I say, or with what words shall I describe all the glorious virtues of this glorious, and just, and blessed man?
Unto whom shall I compare thee, O blessed man, Apa Pisentius?
I will compare thee unto Abel who was the head of the worshipping of God and of the high-priesthood of God, and who became the first to offer up sacrifices and offerings.
For this reason I ascribe blessing to thy holy fatherhood, because thou didst become a father to the orphans, and the mouth of the widow blesseth thee, O thou holy man and bishop, Apa Pisentius.
All the wise folk that were in the land marvelled at thy wisdom, and they had need of thy advocacy in this world.
and they gave glory to thy worship of God.
Thou didst behave like a nobleman towards those who drew nigh unto thee, and the Greeks ascribed glory unto thee.
Thou didst make to be of no effect the office of the absolute ruler.
Thou didst shut the mouths of the beasts, and the cages for prisoners in the prisons fell into disuse, and possessions returned to their rightful owners.
Thou didst conquer Amalek like Joshua, the son of Nun, and thou didst conquer the Amorite like Israel.
Thou didst put on the whole armour of God,^ and therefore thou wast able to quench all the arrows of the Evil One which blazed with fire, and thou didst do battle against all the crafts of the Devil.
Thou didst lay hold on the breastplate of faith, and thou didst put on thy feet the preparation of the Gospel of peace.
Thy fame hath reached to the boundaries of the inhabited world. Thou wast a wise man in the opinion of Governors, even as was Saint Athanasius, and God gave thee strength in the Scriptures.
And thou didst seek to know in thy mind concerning the world which is to come, and thou didst set out to examine into the depth of the wisdom of God, which is hidden.
Thou wast a man inured to the contemplative life, even as was the holy man Apa Pahomd (Pachomius), the father of the coenobite life.
God raised men to very high positions in thy days, and in thy generation He graciously bestowed upon us His peace
God brought forth thy righteousness like the light, and He made thy judgement to be like the hour of noon.
Thou didst keep the commandments of God, and for this reason thy peace was like unto an overflowing river, and thy righteousness like unto the great and mighty deep.
Unto whom shall I liken thee, O holy hermit, Apa Pisentius, thou faithful priest?
I will liken thee unto Noah, of whose holy sacrifice God smelled (the sweet savour). For thou didst taste that the working was good, and thy lamp was not extinguished during the whole night.
Thou didst make for thyself celestial garments of byssus and purple, and thou didst plant a vineyard of the fruit of thy hand.
Thou wast a righteous man in the worshipping of God with all thy heart and with all thy soul.
God gave unto thee rain from heaven as He did to Elijah.
The things which were bitter He made sweet by means of thy ministrations, even as did Elijah.
The desert places became fertile in thy days, and the hills poured out milk during thy generation.
Thou didst build thy children on the Rock which cannot be moved, that is the Christ, and thou didst build in them the faith (or, belief) which is everlasting.
Thou wast the (place of) repose of the men of Egypt, and a kindly inn for those who were strangers.
Thou becamest a sufferer in the service of the poor, and a help unto those who were tortured with grief.
Thou didst shew thyself perfect in spiritual knowledge. Thou didst take thy rest (or, die) in the midst of thy children, like Jacob,
Thou wast a wise man like Solomon, and thou didst inherit the blessing from God.
Because of this thou didst light upon the paths which were delicate, thou didst make good thy escape, thou didst keep the faith, and thou didst set the crown of righteousness upon thy head.
Thou didst deposit seed for thyself in Sion, O Apa Pisentius, and thou didst beget for thyself a household in the Jerusalem of heaven.
Thou didst receive the sword of the Holy Spirit, through prayers of every kind and through supplications of every kind ; and for this reason thou wast able to gain the mastery over the spirits of evil in the darkness.
Thou didst make thyself to resemble the Sun of righteousness in Whose wings there is healing, and because of this the eyes of thy soul sent forth rays of splendour.
Thou didst build a house for God, even as did Solomon, and thou didst complete the courtyard thereof as did Zerubbabel.
Thou didst walk about in the meadow of the Spirit, and therefore thou didst find in the treasury (or, field) holy mysteries.
Thou wast eager to receive in thy heart, and therefore God gave thee the star of the light of the knowledge of Him.
Thou didst eat of heavenly bread, and thou didst rejoice thyself in the tree of immortality.
Unto whom then shall I liken thee, O thou blessed man, thou great priest, Apa Pisentius?
I will liken thee unto Jacob, whom God remembered in his sufferings, because of his innocency, and gave him the inheritance.
I will liken thee also unto Joseph, unto whom God gave a crown of the kingdom (i.e. a royal crown).
I will liken thee unto Samuel, who (became master) of the gifts of grace of the high-priesthood. I will liken thee unto Samuel who became a priest, unto whom God gave the promise of the priesthood and of the office of prophet when he was a little child.
I will liken thee unto the sons of Jonadab/ who kept the commandments of their father.
I will liken thee unto the Great Apostle, Saint Peter, who stood in archiepiscopal rank.
I will liken thee also unto Paul, who had the care of all the Churches.
I will liken thee also unto Zacharias, the high-priest, whom God filled full of the Holy Spirit.
For God gave thee wisdom out of His mouth, even as He did to Solomon.
The man who went to thee, no matter who he was, with a sorrowful heart, did he not come back rejoicing?
O thou true consoler, according to the words of the Psalmist David, 'Thy words give me life, thy words comfort me.'
each of whom was associated with the throne of priesthood like unto thyself.
Now as concerning the marvellous acts of thy great power which were performed with quietness, no man whatsoever can full tale thereof; but those which we have seen with our eyes, and those which we have heard with our ears that love discourses concerning his power, these, I say, are the things which we will now declare.
And a certain man who lived in a neighbouring country, who was a shepherd and was then pasturing his flock, came into the presence of Apa Pisentius that day, in order that he might receive a blessing at his hand.
Now according to the favourable opportunity afforded by God, the shepherd came into the chamber as soon as he found that the door was opened, and he cast himself down at the feet of Apa Pisentius whilst the clergy who had been sent by the Patriarch Damianus were with him.
Then I John, the disciple of Apa Pisentius, laid hold of the man, and I cast him forth.
And when we had gone a little way outside the door, I enquired of him, saying, ' What hast thou been doing to-day to cause the great man to be so angry with thee?
And the shepherd answered and said, ' How did it happen that I did not die this day when I rose up from my sleep?
Now it came to pass that, whilst I was pasturing my sheep to-day among the thorn bushes, a woman passed me on the road whom I knew.
And I laid hold upon her in the foolishness of my heart, and I lay with her, thinking that the great man would never know anything about it.
But, by God, Who is the witness of my soul, immediately he looked at me, the consciousness sprang up in me that he knew what I had done.
And a mighty pain smote me at once in all my body, and I came nigh falling on my face, and I should have done so if it had not been that thou didst seize me, and bring me out by the door.
It (i.e. his look) made me powerless, and I was about to fall upon my face.'
Then that shepherd brought several cheeses in wicker baskets, and he said unto me, ' I entreat thee to take these few cheeses from my hands, and to send them to these men who are with thee in thy house ; since I have brought them, be not grieved at me.'
Then I answered and said unto him, ' I will not take them without the knowledge of the great man, lest if he find it out he scold me.'
And that shepherd answered and said unto me, 'I conjure thee by God Almighty to take them from my hands, and to give them to the poor on my behalf.*
Now when I heard (him mention) the awful Name of God, I felt afraid, and I took them from his hands on account of the oath (which he had sworn) by God.
And I carried them and put them down along with the other cheeses which had been brought unto me that day.
And I said in my heart, 'I will not let the great man know about my act at all'
And it came to pass at the hour of evening that day, that when the time for repose and meditation had come, he (i. e. Apa Pisentius) rose up in order that he might give some cheese to the clergy.
Would not every man who saw him rebuke him, saying, Why is it since God hath given light to thine eyes that thou lovest to adopt the guise of the blind men who walk in darkness at all times?
Verily (even if thou hast to sit up) until midnight thou shalt not sleep in this place until thou hast given them to him.'
Then I said unto Apa Pisentius, 'Forgive me, O my father.
When I had thrown him out of the door, he swore mighty oaths to me, and I was afraid of the oath which he swore in (the Name of) God, and I took the cheeses from him.'
And Apa Pisentius answered and said, 'Do not attempt to anoint my head with the oil of the sinner.
I departed therefore and I gave the cheeses to him on the evening of that same day, and I returned to my place according to the advice of my holy father.
Now ye must know that our righteous father Apa Pisentius was inspired by the Holy Spirit, and he was a righteous man, and if (ye imagine) that he was not, hearken ye unto the following narrative, and ye will assuredly be struck with wonder.
Now it came to pass again on a certain day that my lord and father sent me on a message, which was urgent, to a certain district of Djeme.
Now it was very late in the day when I started to come back, and before I could get back it was dark night.
and they fled as soon as ever they heard the name of the great man, Apa Pisentius.
And when I had journeyed on a little further,
And it came to pass that after her barbarian husband was dead the woman remained in that country. And after (many) days those pagan people among whom the wife of Eustathius was living rose up (or, rebelled), and advanced to seize the country of the Romans.
And the Emperor Trajan was greatly troubled because of the war with these pagan peoples, and he remembered Plaketas, more especially because of his bravery and his numerous defeats of the alien peoples.
And the remembrance of Eustathius kept stirring within him,
and he was troubled about the change which had come upon him in his affairs.
Then he prepared himself and the soldiers who were in his kingdom for the war.
And he grieved exceedingly for Plaketas,
and he spake, saying, ' Him who shall give me such indication as will help me to find him, upon him will I bestow a great honour and a yearly wage, and I will make him exceedingly rich.'
And two of his soldiers—now the name of one of them was Antiochus, and that of the other Aeacius, and they had been servants of Eustathius, and untiring in their ministrations to him in times past when he was living with them—
departed to seek after him, and they searched the whole kingdom through very thoroughly until they arrived at the village wherein Eustathius was.
And as they were going along in. the place wherein Eustathius was keeping watch he saw them from a distance,
and he recognized them by their peculiar carriage, and by their gait.
And he remembered his former manner of life, and he began to feel sorrowful in heart,
and he prayed, saying, 'O Lord God, Thou merciful One, Who deliverest every one who putteth his hope in Thee, since I have seen those who formerly walked with me shall not I have hope?
Now, therefore, give the command, and look upon me and upon Thy servant, that is to say, my wife.
For I know well that because of my own evil works my children have become food for wild beasts, but I entreat Thee to permit me to look upon (them) again in the Resurrection.'
And whilst Eustathius was saying these words he heard a voice which spake unto him, saying, 'Be of good cheer, O Eustathius, at this time,
for thou shalt again have the position which thou hadst formerly, and thou shalt receive thy wife and thy children.
In the resurrection of the dead thou shalt see the good things which are for ever.
Do not deny Me, and thou shalt find a rest which is endless, and thy name shall increase from generation to generation.'
And when he had heard these words Eustathius was afraid, and he walked down from the place where he was,
and he stood up close to where the two soldiers were on the road in front of them,
and he knew them without any doubt, but they did not know him.
They said unto him, 'Hail, good neighbour!'
And he said unto them, 'Peace be unto you, O my brethren!'
They said unto him, 'Dost thou know in this place a man who is a stranger, and is called Plaketas, and his wife, and his children?
If thou canst shew us this man we will give unto thee very much money.'
And Eustathius said unto them, 'For what purpose art thou enquiring after him?'
And they said unto him, 'He was a fellow soldier, and behold, we have been wishing to meet him for many years past.'
And he said unto them, 'I know not the man.
Rest ye, however, with me, for the day is far spent ; rest ye yourselves with me in this Replace which I inhabit.
For I myself am a stranger.'
And he took them into his house,
and then departed to buy some wine to give them to drink.
And he said unto the master of the house wherein he lodged, ' I know these men.
They have come to me here that I may supply them with food and wine ; and they would rest (i.e. lodge) with me in this place. (Give me food and wine) and I will repay thee the price of the same at the time when my wages (are paid)
and the man gave unto him joyfully everything which he needed.
And Eustathius remained and ministered unto them, and he could hardly contain himself when he remembered his former life; nevertheless he kept a strong- hold upon himself, and did not weep,
but he went out (of the house) and wept. And he washed his face,
and went into (the house again), and served them.
And they looked at him, and little by little they began to recognize him, and they spake unto each other, saying, 'This man is like unto the man whom we are seeking;
and the one said unto the other, 'Yea, he is like him. I know that there was a scar on his neck which was caused by a wound which he received in it a long time ago during the war with the Masekates.
Let us watch him carefully so that we may see whether he hath the scar or not.
If he hath the scar on his neck then he is the man.'
And having watched for the sig-n very carefully they saw the mark of the wound on his neck,
and straig-htway they rushed to him, and they kissed him,
and they asked him, saying, 'Art thou not the man Plaketas who was formerly a great general?'
And he denied it, saying, 'Certainly not'; and he kept a strong hold upon himself so that he might not weep.
And when they had pointed out to him the scar of the wound on his neck, they took an oath to him, saying, ' Thou art Plaketas, the general'; and they asked him concerning his wife and his children.
And he said unto them, 'They are dead.'
And whilst he was talking to them about these matters they lifted up their faces with a great cry, and they wept so loudly that all the people who were in the village heard them;
and whilst they were uttering these loud cries the people of the village came to see what had happened, and they were afraid and were greatly moved.
And the soldiers quieted their uproar, and described to them the power and honour which the man had enjoyed formerly.
And when the men of the village had heard these things they heaved sighs, and said, 'Great is the honour of this man who hath become a hireling unto us.'
Then the soldiers reported the matter to the Emperor. And they arrayed Eustathius in good apparel, being such things as they had with them, and they took him
and they took him and set out on their road.
And every one who was in the village walked with him to set him on his way,
and (when) he had supplicated them he sent them away.
And whilst he was travelling along the road with the soldiers he described unto them the things which he had seen (in the thicket), and how he had seen the Christ, and also how he had been named Eustathius,
and he told them about all the things which had happened unto him. And when they had fulfilled fifteen days in marching on the road they came to the place where the Emperor Trajan was,
and they shewed unto him in what manner they had discovered Plaketas.
And Trajan the Emperor came forth to meet him, and he kissed him, and he wept many tears,
and he enquired of him what his reason was for his departure.
And Eustathius related to Trajan and all the nobles what had happened unto him, and the history of his wife and his children
and in what way the captain of the ship had carried away his wife by force, and how his children had been carried off by wild beasts, and he described to them their tribulations.
And there was very great joy indeed in (the hearts of the Emperor and his nobles) because they had found Eustathius alive. And the Emperor comforted him, and made him a general as he had been aforetime.
And when Eustathius had inspected the army he knew that it was not sufficiently strong to fight in battle against the Barbarians,
and he shewed the Emperor that this was so.
And Trajan the Emperor commanded his officers to enlist recruits,
and he wrote an epistle to every city wlierein he ordered the people thereof to enlist men, and to train them, and to make them fit to be used as soldiers.
And it came to pass that when (the envoys) had entered the villag-e wherein were the sons of Eustathius they took the two young men and made recruits of them.
And the men who were in that place bore testimony concerning them, and said that they were vigorous in respect of their strength, and goodly in their appearance.
And when Eustathius had gathered together all the recruits, and had assigned to them their positions, he perceived that the two young men were the most goodly of them all.
And he appointed them to serve him personally, because he knew that they were of noble birth by their manners and habits,
and in his good nature he set them apart to minister unto himself. And their own natural disposition drew them more and more day by day to make him love them,
and he gave orders that they were to eat with him at his table.
And after these things he took command of the army according to his wont,
and he departed to the war and to the country of the Barbarians, which he had taken before that day,
and in which he had set free those who had been kept in captivity therein.
And he crossed the river which is called Hydaspes, and went up over the mountains, and penetrated far into the country of the Barbarians,
and he vanquished the foreigners also, and spoiled the whole country.
And Eustathius took counsel with some of the pagans, and it seemed good to the Providence of God to make him to enter the place where his wife was.
Now this woman had, from the very first, been preserved, even as I have already said, through the care of God, from the violence of the captain of the ship (and of other) masters.
And when this foreigner died she went away by herself, and she took up her abode in the garden of one of the people with whom she lodged,
and she made a booth wherein she might live by herself.
And when the general had taken that town, and had spoiled it, he pitched his camp there for a period of three days, and rested there with his army, because that place was very suitable for encamping in.
And it came to pass that the two young men took up their abode in that garden wherein the booth of their mother was situated.
And as it was the season of noon they sat down and discussed together the affairs of their childhood, but they did not know that their mother was in that place, nor did they know what had happened to them.
And their mother was sitting listening to what they were saying.
And the elder brother said unto the younger brother, 'As concerning the time of my childhood I cannot remember anything at all except that my father was a general, and that my mother was a very beautiful woman, and that they had two children.
One of them was younger than myself, and his hair was red, and his face was handsome.
And they took us, and they came forth from our house one night,
and they embarked with us in a ship wherein we sailed I know not whither.
And when we arrived at the shore on the ship my mother remained by herself on the ship, though for what purpose I know not. As for us our father took the two of us away, and he went on his way weeping.
And having come to a river he swam across it with my little brother,
and me he left on the bank of the stream.
And when he would have returned to carry me over a lion sprang upon me and seized me with his jaws, and went off with me into the desert.
Now certain shepherds who were pasturing their flocks in that place snatched me from the lion, and they brought me up there.
This I do know, but I do not know what happened to my little brother and to my father.'
When the younger brother heard these things from his elder brother he leaped up and wept, and he said, 'Thou art my brother.
For from what thou hast said I know that thou art my lord brother, because I myself was brought by the shepherds who told me that I had been snatched away from the claws of the wolf;
and he embraced him, and they kissed each other.
And as their mother was listening to these thing's she knew that the two young men were her sons by what they had said about her voyage on the ship.
And she said within herself, 'I wonder can these young men be my sons or not?
Can my sons possibly have their forms?'
And she was exceedingly sorrowful, and her bowels were greatly moved when she saw the young men embracing each other and weeping.
And she continued to gaze upon them, and she said, 'These assuredly are my sons, more especially because they said that their father was a general, and that their mother remained on the ship.'
And on the morrow she went to the general and spake unto him, saying, 'I beseech thee (to hear me), O my lord ; I am a woman from the country of the Romans, and I was carried away captive, and they brought me to this place.
I therefore entreat thee to take me back to my native land.'
And whilst she was saying these things she began to recognize in him her husband through the various characteristic marks which she knew to be in him ; and when she had recognized him she was afraid to question him.
And when she was unable any longer to contain herself she cast herself down (before) him, saying, ' I beseech thee, O my lord, be not angry with me,
for I wish thee to make known unto me what thy rank in life was formerly.
Now I think that thou wast Plaketas, the general, who changed his name, and who was called Eustathius, after thou hadst been baptized in the Name of the Christ Jesus, Who did appear unto thee with an animal that was without reasoning power,
And when thou hadst fallen into the trials which the Lord had previously indicated to thee thou didst take thy wife, that is to say, myself, and thy two sons, that is to say, Agapius and Theopistus,
and didst set out for Egypt. And when we had come to the sea we embarked in a ship, and we set sail, and made our passage, and when we had arrived
thou didst punish me through the savage captain of the ship,
who seized me and carried me off to his native land. But, as the Lord Jesus the Christ is my witness, neither that man nor any other hath defiled my body, but have guarded my chastity until this day.
If now thou art Enstathius, as I know thou must be judging by the marks which I can describe unto thee, I conjure thee by the might of the Christ to declare thyself, and not to hide from me anything whatsoever.'
And when Eustathius had heard these things he marvelled exceedingly.
And when he had looked into her face, and recognized her, a mighty joy came upon him.
And he rose up straightway, and embraced her, and said unto her, 'I am Eustathius of whom thou speakest.' And they kissed each other with a spiritual kiss,
and they shed tears in great abundance, and they glorified God Who at all times doeth good things for His servants, and bringeth them out of all tribulation.
And his wife said unto him, 'Where are my sons?'
And he said unto her, and he wept as he said it, 'The wild beasts carried them off'; and he told her what had happened unto them (when they were) with him.
And she said unto him, ' Let us give thanks unto the Lord, for even as He hath given us each to the other, so will He speedily give unto us our sons.'
And Eustathius said unto her, 'I tell thee again that the wild beasts carried them off.'
And she answered and said, 'Whilst I was sitting in the garden yesterday I heard two young men talking together about the events which happened in their early childhood, and they related things which concerned their early years.
And I knew that they were my sons, but they would never have recognized one another had it not been that the words which the elder brother spake supplied the clue that enabled the younger brother to recognize him.
And they declared unto him the things which had happened to them, and immediately he recognized that they were in truth his sons,
and he embraced them with fervour, and he kissed them.
And Eustathius and his wife cast themselves on the necks of their sons,
and they wept long and gave thanks unto God for the marvellous manner in which they had met one another again.
And the rumour of that which had befallen them reached all the multitude of the city,
and all the people gathered together in one place, and they marvelled and rejoiced because Eustathius and his wife and sons had met together once more, but more
 especially for the victory over the Barbarians. And they made a great feast that day because they had met together (again),
And he, because of his valour, whereof he was conscious, and because of his meeting with his wife and sons, was filled to the uttermost with his joy.
And when he had come into the city the Emperor went and entered into the temple of Apollo, but Eustathius did not go in with him, and remained outside.
And the Emperor called him, and asked him why he did not come into the temple of Apollo, (saying), 'Thou must pour out a libation to the gods in return for thy victory, and because thou hast returned from the war, and thou must offer up sacrifices of thanksgiving to them, especially as thou hast found thy wife and thy sons.'
Now, therefore, I know no other god besides Him.
For He is the God Who hath created the heaven and the earth, and it is He alone Who hath done these great marvels.'
Then the Emperor was wroth when he heard these things from Eustathius,
and he made him to withdraw from him as if he had been a pagan, he and his wife and his sons,
and he spake unto them words of terror and threats of destruction.
And the saints neither regarded them nor were they frightened at all.
And when the Emperor saw this great sight, and that the wild beast would not attack them, he fell into doubt.
And he commanded them to make a brazen bull, so that they might cast the saints into it and burn them.
And the multitude gathered together to see the strife, and the spectacle of the saints
and (the servants of the Emperor) seized them with the mechanical contrivances of the instrument for lifting them up into it.
And the blessed Eustathius entreated the honourable people to allow them to pray,
and he spread out his hands, he and his wife and his sons,
and they prayed, saying, 'O Lord God of the Powers, Whom no man hath ever seen, but Whom now we see according to His wish, hearken Thou now unto us who cry unto Thee. Make Thou our prayer to be perfect with one thought, namely, the confession of Thy Name and Thy holy faith.
In this manner do Thou receive us nnto Thyself, through this fire, as a sacrifice well pleasing unto Thee, and because we make ourselves to be also an offering by fire.
And Lord, do Thou grant a favour and a gift unto our bodies, so that every one who shall commemorate us shall receive a gift in the kingdom of heaven, and also a time of rest upon earth.
And if those who are in peril on the sea, or by waters of any kind, cry unto Thy Holy Name, do Thou deliver them from their danger.
And if those who are (burdened) with manifold sins cast themselves down before Thee in Thy Name, do Thou forgive them their sins. And to every one who shall commemorate us on the day (called after) our name, be Thou, O Lord, a helper.
Let the threat of the fire which is round about us become unto us the dew of refreshing, so that our bodies, O Lord, may gain strength thereby.'
And whilst they were saying these words and were praying they heard a voice from heaven, saying, ' Inasmuch as ye have been mighty athletes in this life,
and ye have endured patiently manifold trials, fear ye not at this present, and come ye into this place in peace. Ye shall receive an indestructible crown,
and ye shall enjoy yourselves with the good thing's which have been prepared for you for ever, in the place of the suffering's that ye have endured, and the trials which ye have borne patiently and which were only for a time.'
And when the saints had heard these things they delivered themselves joyfully over to the soldiers, who cast them into the brazen instrument.
And having been thrown in the flame of fire enveloped them, and they ascribed glory unto the Holy Trinity, unto Whom victory belongeth,
and after a short time they delivered up their souls into the hands of God. And the fire did not touch (or, scorch) their bodies in the least degree, nor the hair of their heads.
And after three days the wdcked Emperor Hadrian came to the place wherein the saints had finished (their fight),
And when the evening had come the Christians came and carried away the bodies of the martyred saints, and they laid them in an honourable place secretly in the city of Rome.
Such is the history of the life and contest of these blessed and holy martyrs, that is to say, Apa Eustathius, and Apa Agapius and Apa Theopistus, his sons, and Amma Theopiste, his wife.
Here endeth the account of their strife.
Now every one who shall be worthy to celebrate the holy commemoration (of these saints), and who shall invoke them, shall receive the good things of the kingdom which is in the heavens, through the grace and love for man of our Lord Jesus the Christ, to Whom be glory, and to His Good Father, and to the Holy Spirit, for ever and ever.
Amen.
And there was a man of the sons of Benjamin, and his name was Kis, the son of Abiel, the son of Jared, the son of Bachir, the son of Aphec, the son of a Benjamite, a man of might.
And this man had a son, and his name was Saul, of great stature, a goodly man; and there was not among the sons of Israel a goodlier than he, high above all the people from his shoulders and upward.
And the asses of Kis the father of Saul were lost; and Kis said to Saul his son, Take with thee one of the young men, and arise ye, and go seek the asses.
And they went through mount Ephraim, and they went through the land of Selcha, and found them not: and they passed through the land of Segalim, and they were not there: and they passed through the land of Jamin, and found them not.
And when they came to Siph, then Saul said to his young man that was with him, Come and let us return, lest my father leave the asses, and take care for us.
And the young man said to him, Behold now, there is a man of God in this city, and the man is of high repute; all that he shall speak will surely come to pass: now then let us go, that he may tell us our way on which we have set out.
And Saul said to his young man that was with him, Lo, then, we will go; but what shall we bring the man of God? for the loaves are spent out of our vessels, and we have nothing more with us that belongs to us to bring to the man of God.
And the young man answered Saul again, and said, Behold, there is found in my hand a fourth part of a shekel of silver; and thou shalt give it to the man of God, and he shall tell us our way.
Now before time in Israel every one in going to enquire of God said, Come and let us go to the seer; for the people beforetime called the prophet, the seer.
And Saul said to his servant, Well said, come and let us go: and they went to the city where the man of God was.
As they went up the ascent to the city, they find damsels come out to draw water, and they say to them, Is the seer here?
And the virgins answered them, and they say to them, He is: behold, he is before you: now he is coming to the city, because of the day, for to-day there is a sacrifice for the people in Bama.
As soon as ye shall enter into the city, so shall ye find him in the city, before he goes up to Bama to eat; for the people will not eat until he comes in, for he blesses the sacrifice, and afterwards the guests eat; now then go up, for ye shall find him because of the holiday.
And they go up to the city; and as they were entering into the midst of the city, behold, Samuel came out to meet them, to go up to Bama.
And the Lord uncovered the ear of Samuel one day before Saul came to him, saying,
At this time to-morrow I will send to thee a man out of the land of Benjamin, and thou shalt anoint him to be ruler over my people Israel, and he shall save my people out of the hand of the Philistines; for I have looked upon the humiliation of my people, for their cry is come unto me.
And Samuel looked upon Saul, and the Lord answered him, Behold the man of whom I spoke to thee, this one shall rule over my people.
And Saul drew near to Samuel into the midst of the city, and said, Tell me now which is the house of the seer?
And Samuel answered Saul, and said, I am he: go up before me to Bama, and eat with me to-day, and I will send thee away in the morning, and I will tell thee all that is in thine heart.
And concerning thine asses that have been lost now these three days, care not for them, for they are found. And to whom does the excellency of Israel belong? does it not to thee and to thy father's house?
And Saul answered and said, Am not I the son of a Benjamite, the least tribe of the people of Israel? and of the least family of the whole tribe of Benjamin? and why hast thou spoken to me according to this word?
And Samuel took Saul and his servant, and brought them to the inn, and set them there a place among the chief of those that were called, about seventy men.
And Samuel said to the cook, Give me the portion which I gave thee, which I told thee to set by thee.
Now the cook had boiled the shoulder, and he set it before Saul; and Samuel said to Saul, Behold that which is left: set before thee, an eat; for it is set thee for a testimony in preference to the others; take of it: and Saul ate with Samuel on that day.
And he went down from Bama into the city; and they prepared a lodging for Saul on the roof, and he lay down.
An it came to pass when the morning dawned, that Samuel called Saul on the roof, saying, Rise up, and I will dismiss thee. And Saul arose, and he and Samuel went out.
As they went down to a part of the city, Samuel said to Saul, Speak to the young man, and let him pass on before us; and do thou stand as to-day, and hearken to the word of God.
Sing to the Lord a new song: his praise is in the assembly of the saints.
Let Israel rejoice in him that made him; and let the children of Sion exult in their king.
Let them praise his name in the dance: let them sings praises to him with timbrel and psaltery.
For the Lord takes pleasure in his people; and will exalt the meek with salvation.
The saints shall rejoice in glory; and shall exult on their beds.
The high praises of God shall be in their throat, and two-edged swords in their hands;
to execute vengeance on the nations, and punishments among the peoples;
to bind their kings with fetters, and their nobles with manacles of iron; to execute on them the judgment written: this honour have all his saints.
These things says the man to them that trust in God; and I cease.
For I am the most simple of all men, and there is not in me the wisdom of men.
God has taught me wisdom, and I know the knowledge of the holy.
Who has gone up to heaven, and come down? who has gathered the winds in his bosom? who has wrapped up the waters in a garment? who has dominion of all the ends of the earth? what is his name? or what is the name of his children?
For all the words of God are tried in the fire, and he defends those that reverence him.
Add not unto his words, lest he reprove thee, and thou be made a liar.
Two things I ask of thee; take not favour from me before I die.
Remove far from me vanity and falsehood: and give me not wealth or poverty; but appoint me what is needful and sufficient:
lest I be filled and become false, and say, Who sees me? or be poor and steal, and swear vainly by the name of God.
Deliver not a servant into the hands of his master, lest he curse thee, and thou be utterly destroyed.
A wicked generation curse their father, and do not bless their mother.
A wicked generation judge themselves to be just, but do not cleanse their way.
A wicked generation have lofty eyes, and exalt themselves with their eyelids.
A wicked generation have swords for teeth and jaw-teeth as knives, so as to destroy and devour the lowly from the earth, and the poor of them from among men.
The horse-leech had three dearly-beloved daughters: and these three did not satisfy her; and the fourth was not contented so as to say, Enough.
The grave, and the love of a woman, and the earth not filled with water; water also and fire will not say, It is enough.
The eye that laughs to scorn a father, and dishonours the old age of a mother, let the ravens of the valleys pick it out, and let the young eagles devour it.
Moreover there are three things impossible for me to comprehend, and the fourth I know not:
the track of a flying eagle; and the ways of a serpent on a rock; and the paths of a ship passing through the sea; and the ways of a man in youth.
Such is the way of an adulterous woman, who having washed herself from what she has done, says she has done nothing amiss.
By three thing the earth is troubled, and the fourth it cannot bear:
if a servant reign; or a fool be filled with food;
or if a maid-servant should cast out her own mistress; and if a hateful woman should marry a good man.
And there are four very little things upon the earth, but these are wiser than the wise:
the ants which are weak, and yet prepare their food in summer;
the rabbits also are a feeble race, who make their houses in the rocks.
The locusts have no king, and yet march orderly at one command.
And the eft, which supports itself by its hands, and is easily taken, dwells in the fortresses of kings.
And there are three things which go well, and a fourth which passes along finely.
A lion's whelp, stronger than all other beasts, which turns not away, nor fears any beast;
and a cock walking in boldly among the hens, and the goat leading the herd; and a king publicly speaking before a nation.
If thou abandon thyself to mirth, and stretch forth thine hand in a quarrel, thou shalt be disgraced.
Milk out milk, and there shall be butter, and if thou wing one's nostrils there shall come out blood: so if thou extort words, there will come forth quarrels and strifes.
And Isaac having called for Jacob, blessed him, and charged him, saying, Thou shalt not take a wife of the daughters of the Chananites.
Rise and depart quickly into Mesopotamia, to the house of Bathuel the father of thy mother, and take to thyself thence a wife of the daughters of Laban thy mother's brother.
And thy seed shall be as the sand of the earth; and it shall spread abroad to the sea, and the south, and the north, and to the east; and in thee and in thy seed shall all the tribes of the earth be blessed.
And behold I am with thee to preserve thee continually in all the way wherein thou shalt go; and I will bring thee back to this land; for I will not desert thee, until I have done all that I have said to thee.
And Jacob awaked out of his sleep, and said, The Lord is in this place, and I knew it not.
And Jacob vowed a vow, saying, If the Lord God will be with me, and guard me throughout on this journey, on which I am going, and give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on,
and bring me back in safety to the house of my father, then shall the Lord be for a God to me.
And this stone, which I have set up for a pillar, shall be to me a house of God; and of all whatsoever thou shalt give me, I will tithe a tenth for thee.
Cursed is the man that does the works of the Lord carelessly, keeping back his sword from blood.
Many have sinned for a small matter; and he that seeketh for abundance will turn his eyes away.
As a nail sticketh fast between the joinings of the stones; so doth sin stick close between buying and selling.
Unless a man hold himself diligently in the fear of the Lord, his house shall soon be overthrown.
As when one sifteth with a sieve, the refuse remaineth; so the filth of man in his talk.
The furnace proveth the potter's vessels; so the trial of man is in his reasoning.
The fruit declareth if the tree have been dressed; so is the utterance of a conceit in the heart of man.
Praise no man before thou hearest him speak; for this is the trial of men.
If thou followest righteousness, thou shalt obtain her, and put her on, as a glorious long robe.
The birds will resort unto their like; so will truth return unto them that practise in her.
As the lion lieth in wait for the prey; so sin for them that work iniquity.
The discourse of a godly man is always with wisdom; but a fool changeth as the moon.
If thou be among the indiscreet, observe the time; but be continually among men of understanding.
The discourse of fools is irksome, and their sport is the wantonness of sin.
The talk of him that sweareth much maketh the hair stand upright; and their brawls make one stop his ears.
The strife of the proud is bloodshedding, and their revilings are grievous to the ear.
Whoso discovereth secrets loseth his credit; and shall never find friend to his mind.
Love thy friend, and be faithful unto him: but if thou betrayest his secrets, follow no more after him.
For as a man hath destroyed his enemy; so hast thou lost the love of thy neighbour.
As one that letteth a bird go out of his hand, so hast thou let thy neighbour go, and shalt not get him again
Follow after him no more, for he is too far off; he is as a roe escaped out of the snare.
As for a wound, it may be bound up; and after reviling there may be reconcilement: but he that betrayeth secrets is without hope.
He that winketh with the eyes worketh evil: and he that knoweth him will depart from him.
When thou art present, he will speak sweetly, and will admire thy words: but at the last he will writhe his mouth, and slander thy sayings.
I have hated many things, but nothing like him; for the Lord will hate him.
Whoso casteth a stone on high casteth it on his own head; and a deceitful stroke shall make wounds.
Whoso diggeth a pit shall fall therein: and he that setteth a trap shall be taken therein.
He that worketh mischief, it shall fall upon him, and he shall not know whence it cometh.
Mockery and reproach are from the proud; but vengeance, as a lion, shall lie in wait for them.
They that rejoice at the fall of the righteous shall be taken in the snare; and anguish shall consume them before they die.
Malice and wrath, even these are abominations; and the sinful man shall have them both.
These are the words which Moses spoke to all Israel on this side Jordan in the desert towards the west near the Red Sea, between Pharan Tophol, and Lobon, and Aulon, and the gold works.
It is a journey of eleven days from Choreb to mount Seir as far as Cades Barne.
And it came to pass in the fortieth year, in the eleventh month, on the first day of the month, Moses spoke to all the children of Israel, according to all things which the Lord commanded him for them:
after he had smitten Seon king of the Amorites who dwelt in Esebon, and Og the king of Basan who dwelt in Astaroth and in Edrain;
beyond Jordan in the land of Moab, Moses began to declare this law, saying,
The Lord your God spoke to us in Choreb, saying, Let it suffice you to have dwelt so long in this mountain.
Turn ye and depart and enter into the mountain of the Amorites, and go to all that dwell near about Araba, to the mountain and the plain and to the south, and the land of the Chananites near the sea, and Antilibanus, as far as the great river, the river Euphrates.
Behold, God has delivered the land before you; go in and inherit the land, which I sware to your fathers, Abraam, and Isaac, and Jacob, to give it to them and to their seed after them.
And I spoke to you at that time, saying, I shall not be able by myself to bear you.
The Lord your God has multiplied you, and, behold, ye are to-day as the stars of heaven for multitude.
The Lord God of your fathers add to you a thousand-fold more than you are, and bless you as he has spoken to you.
How shall I alone be able to bear your labour, and your burden, and your gainsayings?
Take to yourselves wise and understanding and prudent men for your tribes, and I will set your leaders over you.
And ye answered me and said, The thing which thou hast told us is good to do.
So I took of you wise and understanding and prudent men, and I set them to rule over you as rulers of thousands, and rulers of hundreds, and rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens, and officers to your judges.
And I charged your judges at that time, saying, Hear causes between your brethren, and judge rightly between a man and his brother, and the stranger that is with him.
Thou shalt not have respect to persons in judgment, thou shalt judge small and great equally; thou shalt not shrink from before the person of a man, for the judgment is God's; and whatsoever matter shall be too hard for you, ye shall bring it to me, and I will hear it.
And I charged upon you at that time all the commands which ye shall perform.
And we departed from Choreb, and went through all that great wilderness and terrible, which ye saw, by the way of the mountain of the Amorite, as the Lord our God charged us, and we came as far as Cades Barne.
And I said to you, Ye have come as far as the mountain of the Amorite, which the Lord our God gives to you:
behold, the Lord your God has delivered to us the land before you: go up and inherit it as the Lord God of your fathers said to you; fear not, neither be afraid.
And ye all came to me, and said, Let us send men before us, and let them go up to the land for us; and let them bring back to us a report of the way by which we shall go up, and of the cities into which we shall enter.
And the saying pleased me: and I took of you twelve men, one man of a tribe.
And they turned and went up to the mountain, and they came as far as the valley of the cluster, and surveyed it.
And they took in their hands of the fruit of the land, and brought it to you, and said, The land is good which the Lord our God gives us.
Yet ye would not go up, but rebelled against the words of the Lord our God.
And ye murmured in your tents, and said, Because the Lord hated us, he has brought us out of the land of Egypt to deliver us into the hands of the Amorites, to destroy us.
Whither do we go up? and your brethren drew away your heart, saying, It is a great nation and populous, and mightier than we; and there are cities great and walled up to heaven: moreover we saw there the sons of the giants.
And I said to you, Fear not, neither be ye afraid of them;
the Lord your God who goes before your face, he shall fight against them together with you effectually, according to all that he wrought for you in the land of Egypt;
and in this wilderness which ye saw, by the way of the mountain of the Amorite; how the Lord thy God will bear thee as a nursling, as if any man should nurse his child, through all the way which ye have gone until ye came to this place.
And in this matter ye believed not the Lord our God,
who goes before you in the way to choose you a place, guiding you in fire by night, shewing you the way by which ye go, and a cloud by day.
And the Lord heard the voice of your words, and being greatly provoked he sware, saying,
Not one of these men shall see this good land, which I sware to their fathers,
except Chaleb the son of Jephonne, he shall see it; and to him I will give the land on which he went up, and to his sons, because he attended to the things of the Lord.
And the Lord was angry with me for your sake, saying, Neither shalt thou by any means enter therein.
Joshua the son of Naue, who stands by thee, he shall enter in there; do thou strengthen him, for he shall cause Israel to inherit it.
And every young child who this day knows not good or evil, they shall enter therein, and to them I will give it, and they shall inherit it.
And ye turned and marched into the wilderness, in the way by the Red Sea.
And ye answered and said, We have sinned before the Lord our God; we will go up and fight according to all that the Lord our God has commanded us: and having taken every one his weapons of war, and being gathered together, ye went up to the mountain.
And the Lord said to me, Tell them, Ye shall not go up, neither shall ye fight, for I am not with you; thus shall ye not be destroyed before your enemies.
And I spoke to you, and ye did not hearken to me; and ye transgressed the commandment of the Lord; and ye forced your way and went up into the mountain.
And the Amorite who dwelt in that mountain came out to meet you, and pursued you as bees do, and wounded you from Seir to Herma.
And ye sat down and wept before the Lord our God, and the Lord hearkened not to your voice, neither did he take heed to you.
In those days, and at that time, the children of Israel shall come, they and the children of Juda together; they shall proceed, weeping as they go, seeking the Lord their God.
They shall ask the way till they come to Sion, for that way shall they set their face; and they shall come and flee for refuge to the Lord their God; for the everlasting covenant shall not be forgotten.
My people have been lost sheep: their shepherds thrust them out, they caused them to wander on the mountains: they went from mountain to hill, they forgot their resting-place.
All that found them consumed them: their enemies said, Let us not leave them alone, because they have sinned against the Lord: he that gathered their fathers had a pasture of righteousness.
Flee ye out of the midst of Babylon, and from the land of the Chaldeans, and go forth, and be as serpents before sleep.
For, behold, I stir up against Babylon the gatherings of nations out of the land of the north; and they shall set themselves in array against her: thence shall she be taken, as the dart of an expert warrior shall not return empty.
And Chaldea shall be a spoil: all that spoil her shall be satisfied.
Because ye rejoiced, and boasted, while plundering mine heritage; because ye exulted as calves in the grass, and pushed with the horn as bulls.
Your mother is greatly ashamed; your mother that bore you for prosperity is confounded: she is the last of the nations, desolate,
by reason of the Lord's anger: it shall not be inhabited, but it shall be all a desolation; and every one that passes through Babylon shall scowl, and they shall hiss at all her plague.
Set yourselves in array against Babylon round about, all ye that bend the bow; shoot at her, spare not your arrows,
and prevail against her: her hands are weakened, her bulwarks are fallen, and her wall is broken down: for it is vengeance from God: take vengeance upon her; as she has done, do to her.
Utterly destroy seed out of Babylon, and him that holds a sickle in time of harvest: for fear of the Grecian sword, they shall return every one to his people, and every one shall flee to his own land.
Israel is a wandering sheep; the lions have driven him out: the king of Assyria first devoured him, and afterward this king of Babylon has gnawed his bones.
Therefore thus saith the Lord; Behold, I will take vengeance on the king of Babylon, and upon his land, as I took vengeance on the king of Assyria.
And I will restore Israel to his pasture, and he shall feed on Carmel and on mount Ephraim and in Galaad, and his soul shall be satisfied.
In those days, and at that time, they shall seek for the iniquity of Israel, and there shall be none; and for the sins of Juda, and they shall not be found: for I will be merciful to them that are left
For the end, a Psalm of David. O God, pass not over my praise in silence;
for the mouth of the sinner and the mouth of the crafty man have been opened against me: they have spoken against me with a crafty tongue.
And they have compassed me with words of hatred; and fought against me without a cause.
Instead of loving me, they falsely accused me: but I continued to pray.
And they rewarded me evil for good, and hatred for my love.
Set thou a sinner against him; and let the devil stand at his right hand.
When he is judged, let him go forth condemned: and let his prayer become sin.
Let his days be few: and let another take his office of overseer.
Let his children be orphans, and his wife a widow.
Let his children wander without a dwelling-place, and beg: let them be cast out of their habitations.
Let his creditor exact all that belongs to him: and let strangers spoil his labours.
Let him have no helper; neither let there be any one to have compassion on his fatherless children.
Let his children be given up to utter destruction: in one generation let his name be blotted out.
Let the iniquity of his fathers be remembered before the Lord; and let not the sin of his mother be blotted out.
Let them be before the Lord continually; and let their memorial be blotted out from the earth.
Because he remembered not to shew mercy, but persecuted the needy and poor man, and that to slay him that was pricked in the heart.
He loved cursing also, and it shall come upon him; and he took not pleasure in blessing, so it shall be removed far from him.
Yea, he put on cursing as a garment, and it is come as water into his bowels, and as oil into his bones.
Let it be to him as a garment which he puts on, and as a girdle with which he girds himself continually.
This is the dealing of the Lord with those who falsely accuse me, and of them that speak evil against my soul.
But thou, O Lord, Lord, deal mercifully with me, for thy name's sake: for thy mercy is good.
Deliver me, for I am poor and needy; and my heart is troubled within me.
I am removed as a shadow in its going down: I am tossed up and down like locusts.
My knees are weakened through fasting, and my flesh is changed by reason of the want of oil.
I became also a reproach to them: when they saw me they shook their heads.
Help me, O Lord my God; and save me according to thy mercy.
And let them know that this is thy hand; and that thou, Lord, hast wrought it.
Let them curse, but thou shalt bless: let them that rise up against me be ashamed, but let thy servant rejoice.
Let those that falsely accuse me be clothed with shame, and let them cover themselves with their shame as with a mantle.
I will give thanks to the Lord abundantly with my mouth; and in the midst of many I will praise him.
For he stood on the right hand of the poor, to save me from them that persecute my soul.
Thou shalt not sacrifice to the Lord thy God a calf or a sheep, in which there is a blemish, or any evil thing; for it is an abomination to the Lord thy God.
And if there should be found in any one of thy cities, which the Lord thy God gives thee, a man or a woman who shall do that which is evil before the Lord thy God, so as to transgress his covenant,
and they should go and serve other gods, and worship them, the sun, or the moon, or any of the host of heaven, which he commanded thee not to do,
and it be told thee, and thou shalt have enquired diligently, and, behold, the thing really took place, this abomination has been done in Israel;
then shalt thou bring out that man, or that woman, and ye shall stone them with stones, and they shall die.
He shall die on the testimony of two or three witnesses; a man who is put to death shall not be put to death for one witness.
And the hand of the witnesses shall be upon him among the first to put him to death, and the hand of the people at the last; so shalt thou remove the evil one from among yourselves.
And if a matter shall be too hard for thee in judgment, between blood and blood, and between cause and cause, and between stroke and stroke, and between contradiction and contradiction, matters of judgment in your cities;
then thou shalt arise and go up to the place which the Lord thy God shall choose, and thou shalt come to the priests the Levites, and to the judge who shall be in those days, and they shall search out the matter and report the judgment to thee.
And thou shalt act according to the thing which they shall report to thee out of the place which the Lord thy God shall choose, and thou shalt observe to do all whatsoever shall have been by law appointed to thee.
Thou shalt do according to the law and to the judgment which they shall declare to thee: thou shalt not swerve to the right hand or to the left from any sentence which they shall report to thee.
And the man whosoever shall act in haughtiness, so as not to hearken to the priest who stands to minister in the name of the Lord thy God, or the judge who shall preside in those days, that man shall die, and thou shalt remove the evil one out of Israel.
And all the people shall hear and fear, and shall no more commit impiety.
And when thou shalt enter into the land which the Lord thy God gives thee, and shalt inherit it and dwell in it, and shalt say, I will set a ruler over me, as also the other nations round about me;
thou shalt surely set over thee the ruler whom the Lord God shall choose: of thy brethren thou shalt set over thee a ruler; thou shalt not have power to set over thee a stranger, because he is not thy brother.
For he shall not multiply to himself horses, and he shall by no means turn the people back to Egypt, lest he should multiply to himself horses; for the Lord said, Ye shall not any more turn back by that way.
And he shall not multiply to himself wives, lest his heart turn away; and he shall not greatly multiply to himself silver and gold.
And when he shall be established in his government, then shall he write for himself this repetition of the law into a book by the hands of the priests the Levites;
and it shall be with him, and he shall read in it all the days of his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord thy God, and to keep all these commandments, and to observe these ordinances:
that his heart be not lifted up above his brethren, that he depart not from the commandments on the right hand or on the left; that he and his sons may reign long in his dominion among the children of Israel.
And when the kings of the Amorites on the other side of Jordan, who were in the mountain country, and in the plain, and in all the coast of the great sea, and those who were near Antilibanus, and the Chettites, and the Chananites, and the Pherezites, and the Evites, and the Amorites, and the Gergesites, and the Jebusites, heard of it,
they came all together at the same time to make war against Joshua and Israel.
And all Israel, and their elders, and their judges, and their scribes, passed on one side and on the other, before the ark; and the priests and the levites took up the ark of the covenant of the Lord; and the stranger and the native were there, who were half of them near mount Gebal, as Moses the servant of the Lord commanded at first, to bless the people.
And Noemin had a friend an acquaintance of her husband, and the man was a mighty man of the kindred of Elimelech, and his name was Booz.
And Ruth the Moabitess said to Noemin, Let me go now to the field, and I will glean among the ears behind the man with whomsoever I shall find favour: and she said to her, Go, daughter.
And she went; and came and gleaned in the field behind the reapers; and she happened by chance to come on a portion of the land of Booz, of the kindred of Elimelech.
And, behold, Booz came from Bethleem, and said to the reapers, The Lord be with you: and they said to him, The Lord bless thee.
And Booz said to his servant who was set over the reapers, Whose is this damsel?
And his servant who was set over the reapers answered and said, It is the Moabitish damsel who returned with Noemin out of the land of Moab.
And she said, I pray you, let me glean and gather among the sheaves after the reapers: and she came and stood from morning till evening, and rested not even a little in the field.
And Booz said to Ruth, Hast thou not heard, my daughter? go not to glean in another field; and depart not thou hence, join thyself here with my damsels.
Let thine eyes be on the field where my men shall reap, and thou shalt go after them: behold, I have charged the young men not to touch thee: and when you shalt thirst, then thou shalt go to the vessels, and drink of that which the young men shall have drawn.
And she fell upon her face, and did reverence to the ground, and said to him, How is it that I have found grace in thine eyes, that thou shouldest take notice of me, whereas I am a stranger?
And Booz answered and said to her, It has fully been told me how thou hast dealt with thy mother-in-law after the death of thy husband; and how thou didst leave thy father and thy mother, and the land of thy birth, and camest to a people whom thou knewest not before.
The Lord recompense thy work; may a full reward be given thee of the Lord God of Israel, to whom thou hast come to trust under his wings.
And she said, Let me find grace in thy sight, my lord, because thou hast comforted me, and because thou hast spoken kindly to thy handmaid, and behold, I shall be as one of thy servants.
And Booz said to her, Now it is time to eat; come hither, and thou shalt eat of the bread, and thou shalt dip thy morsel in the vinegar: and Ruth sat by the side of the reapers: and Booz handed her meal, and she ate, and was satisfied, and left.
And she rose up to glean; and Booz charged his young men, saying, Let her even glean among the sheaves, and reproach her not.
And do ye by all means carry it for her, and ye shall surely let fall for her some of that which is heaped up; and let her eat, and glean, and rebuke her not.
So she gleaned in the field till evening, and beat out that she had gleaned, and it was about an ephah of barely.
And she took it up, and went into the city: and her mother-in-law saw what she had gleaned, and Ruth brought forth and gave to her the food which she had left from what she had been satisfied with.
And her mother-in-law said to her, Where hast thou gleaned to-day, and where hast thou wrought? blessed be he that took notice of thee. And Ruth told her mother-in-law where she had wrought, and said, The name of the man with whom I wrought to-day is Booz.
And Noemin said to her daughter-in-law, Blessed is he of the Lord, because he has not failed in his mercy with the living and with the dead: and Noemin said to her, The man is near akin to us, he is one of our relations.
And Ruth said to her mother-in-law, Yea, he said also to me, Keep close to my damsels, until the men shall have finished all my reaping.
And Noemin said to Ruth her daughter-in-law, It is well, daughter, that thou wentest out with his damsels; thus they shall not meet thee in another field.
And Ruth joined herself to the damsels of Booz to glean until they had finished the barley-harvest and the wheat-harvest.
As dew in harvest, and as rain in summer, so honour is not seemly for a fool.
As birds and sparrows fly, so a curse shall not come upon any one without a cause.
As a whip for a horse, and a goad for an ass, so is a rod for a simple nation.
Answer not a fool according to his folly, lest thou become like him.
Yet answer a fool according to his folly, lest he seem wise in his own conceit.
He that sends a message by a foolish messenger procures for himself a reproach from his own ways.
As well take away the motion of the legs, as transgression from the mouth of fools.
He that binds up a stone in a sling, is like one that gives glory to a fool.
Thorns grow in the hand of a drunkard, and servitude in the hand of fools.
All the flesh of fools endures much hardship; for their fury is brought to nought.
As when a dog goes to his own vomit, and becomes abominable, so is fool who returns in his wickedness to his own sin. [There is a shame that brings sin: and there is a shame that is glory and grace.]
I have seen a man who seemed to himself to be wise; but a fool had more hope than he.
A sluggard when sent on a journey says, There is a lion in the ways, and there are murderers in the streets.
As a door turns on the hinge, so does a sluggard on his bed.
A sluggard having hid his hand in his bosom, will not be able to bring it up to his mouth.
A sluggard seems to himself wiser than one who most satisfactorily brings back a message.
As he that lays hold of a dog's tail, so is he that makes himself the champion of another's cause.
As those who need correction put forth fair words to men, and he that first falls in with the proposal will be overthrown;
so are all that lay wait for their own friends, and when they are discovered, say, I did it in jest.
With much wood fire increases; but where there is not a double-minded man, strife ceases.
A hearth for coals, and wood for fire; and railing man for the tumult of strife.
The words of cunning knaves are soft; but they smite even to the inmost parts of the bowels.
Silver dishonestly given is to be considered as a potsherd: smooth lips cover a grievous heart.
A weeping enemy promises all things with his lips, but in his heart he contrives deceit.
Though thine enemy intreat thee with a loud voice, consent not: for there are seven abominations in his heart.
He that hides enmity frames deceit: but being easily discerned, exposes his own sins in the public assemblies.
He that digs a pit for his neighbour shall fall into it: and he that rolls a stone, rolls it upon himself.
A lying tongue hates the truth; and an unguarded mouth causes tumults.
And there shall come forth a rod out of the root of Jesse, and a blossom shall come up from his root:
and the Spirit of God shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and strength, the spirit of knowledge and godliness shall fill him;
the spirit of the fear of God. He shall not judge according to appearance, nor reprove according to report:
but he shall judge the cause of the lowly, and shall reprove the lowly of the earth: and he shall smite the earth with the word of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips shall he destroy the ungodly one.
And he shall have his loins girt with righteousness, and his sides clothed with truth.
And the wolf shall feed with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid; and the young calf and bull and lion shall feed together; and a little child shall lead them.
And the ox and bear shall feed together; and their young shall be together: and the lion shall eat straw like the ox.
And an infant shall put his hand on the holes of asps, and on the nest of young asps.
And they shall not hurt, nor shall they at all be able to destroy any one on my holy mountain: for the whole world is filled with the knowledge of the Lord, as much water covers the seas.
And in that day there shall be a root of Jesse, and he that shall arise to rule over the Gentiles; in him shall the Gentiles trust, and his rest shall be glorious.
And it shall be in that day, that the Lord shall again shew his hand, to be zealous for the remnant that is left of the people, which shall be left by the Assyrians, and that from Egypt, and from the country of Babylon, and from Ethiopia, and from the Elamites, and from the rising of the sun, and out of Arabia.
And he shall lift up a standard for the nations, and he shall gather the lost ones of Israel, and he shall gather the dispersed of Juda from the four corners of the earth.
And the envy of Ephraim shall be taken away, and the enemies of Juda shall perish: Ephraim shall not envy Juda, and Juda shall not afflict Ephraim.
And they shall fly in the ships of the Philistines: they shall at the same time spoil the sea, and them that come from the east, and Idumea: and they shall lay their hands on Moab first; but the children of Ammon shall first obey them.
And the Lord shall make desolate the sea of Egypt; and he shall lay his hand on the river with a strong wind, and he shall smite the seven channels, so that men shall pass through it dry-shod.
And there shall be a passage for my people that is left in Egypt: and it shall be to Israel as the day when he came forth out of the land of Egypt.
They that trust in the Lord shall be as mount Sion: he that dwells in Jerusalem shall never be moved.
The mountains are round about her, and so the Lord is round about his people, from henceforth and even for ever.
For the Lord will not allow the rod of sinners to be upon the lot of the righteous; lest the righteous should stretch forth their hands to iniquity.
Do good, O Lord, to them that are good, and to them that are upright in heart.
But them that turn aside to crooked ways the Lord will lead away with the workers of iniquity: but peace shall be upon Israel.
Shall not my soul be subjected to God? for of him is my salvation.
For he is my God, and my saviour; my helper, I shall not be moved very much.
How long will ye assault a man? ye are all slaughtering as with a bowed wall and a broken hedge.
They only took counsel to set at nought mine honour: I ran in thirst: with their mouth they blessed, but with their heart they cursed. Pause.
Nevertheless do thou, my soul, be subjected to God; for of him is my patient hope.
For he is my God and my Saviour; my helper, I shall not be moved.
In God is my salvation and my glory: he is the God of my help, and my hope is in God.
Hope in him, all ye congregation of the people; pour out your hearts before him, for God is our helper. Pause.
But the sons of men are vain; the sons of men are false, so as to be deceitful in the balances; they are all alike formed out of vanity.
Trust not in unrighteousness, and lust not after robberies: if wealth should flow in, set not your heart upon it.
God has spoken once, and I have heard these two things, that power is of God;
and mercy is thine, O Lord; for thou wilt recompense every one according to his works.
And David again gathered all the young men of Israel, about seventy thousand.
And David arose, and went, he and all the people that were with him, and some of the rulers of Juda, on an expedition to a distant place, to bring back thence the ark of God, on which the name of the Lord of Host who dwells between the cherubs upon it is called.
And they put the ark of the Lord on a new waggon, and took it out of the house of Aminadab who lived on the hill, and Oza and his brethren the sons of Aminadab drove the waggon with the ark.
And his brethren went before the ark.
And David and the children of Israel were playing before the Lord on well-tuned instruments mightily, and with songs, and with harps, and with lutes, and with drums, and with cymbals, and with pipes.
And they come as far as the threshing floor of Nachor: and Oza reached forth his hand to the ark of God to keep it steady, and took hold of it; for the ox shook it out of its place.
And the Lord was very angry with Oza; and God smote him there: and he died there by the ark of the Lord before God.
And David was dispirited because the Lord made a breach upon Oza; and that place was called the breach of Oza until this day.
And David feared the Lord in that day, saying, How shall the ark of the Lord come in to me?
And David would not bring in the ark of the covenant of the Lord to himself into the city of David: and David turned it aside into the house of Abeddara the Gethite.
And the ark of the Lord lodged in the house of Abeddara the Gethite three months, and the Lord blessed all the house of Abeddara, and all his possessions.
And it was reported to king David, saying, The Lord has blessed the house of Abeddara, and all that he has, because of the ark of the Lord. And David went, and brought up the Ark of the Lord from the house of Abeddara to the city of David with gladness.
And there were with him bearing the ark seven bands, and for a sacrifice a calf and lambs.
And David sounded with well-tuned instruments before the Lord, and David was clothed with a fine long robe.
And David and all the house of Israel brought up the ark of the Lord with shouting, and with the sound of a trumpet.
And it came to pass as the ark arrived at the city of David, that Melchol the daughter of Saul looked through the window, and saw king David dancing and playing before the Lord; and she despised him in her heart.
And they bring the ark of the Lord, and set it in its place in the midst of the tabernacle which David pitched for it: and David offered whole-burnt-offerings before the Lord, and peace-offerings.
And David made an end of offering the whole-burnt-offerings and peace-offerings, and blessed the people in the name of the Lord of Hosts.
And he distributed to all the people, even to all the host of Israel from Dan to Bersabee, both men and women, to every one a cake of bread, and a joint of meat, and a cake from the frying-pan: and all the people departed every one to his home.
And David returned to bless his house. And Melchol the daughter of Saul came out to meet David and saluted him, and said, How was the king of Israel glorified to-day, who was to-day uncovered in the eyes of the handmaids of his servants, as one of the dancers wantonly uncovers himself!
And David said to Melchol, I will dance before the Lord. Blessed be the Lord who chose me before thy father, and before all his house, to make me head over his people, even over Israel: therefore I will play, and dance before the Lord.
And I will again uncover myself thus, and I will be vile in thine eyes, and with the maid-servants by whom thou saidst that I was not had in honour.
And Melchol the daughter of Saul had no child till the day of her death.
Now then ye did not send me hither, but God; and he hath made me as a father of Pharao, and lord of all his house, and ruler of all the land of Egypt.
Hasten, therefore, and go up to my father, and say to him, These things saith thy son Joseph; God has made me lord of all the land of Egypt; come down therefore to me, and tarry not.
Behold, your eyes see, and the eyes of my brother Benjamin, that it is my mouth that speaks to you.
Report, therefore, to my father all my glory in Egypt, and all things that ye have seen, and make haste and bring down my father hither.
And he fell on his brother Benjamin's neck, and wept on him; and Benjamin wept on his neck.
And Israel said, It is a great thing for me if Joseph my son is yet alive. I will go and see him before I die.
Hear the word of the Lord, ye children of Israel: for the Lord has a controversy with the inhabitants of the land, because there is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land.
Cursing, and lying, and murder, and theft, and adultery abound in the land, and they mingle blood with blood.
Therefore shall the land mourn, and shall be diminished with all that dwell in it, with the wild beasts of the field, and the reptiles of the earth, and with the birds of the sky, and the fish of the sea shall fail:
that neither any one may plead, nor any one reprove another; but my people are as a priest spoken against.
Therefore they shall fall by day, and the prophet with thee shall fall: I have compared thy mother unto night.
My people are like as if they had no knowledge: because thou hast rejected knowledge, I will also reject thee, that thou shalt not minister as priest to me: and as thou has forgotten the law of thy God, I also will forget thy children.
According to their multitude, so they sinned against me: I will turn their glory into shame.
They will devour the sins of my people, and will set their hearts on their iniquities.
And the priest shall be as the people: and I will avenge on them their ways, and I will recompense to them their counsels.
And they shall eat, and shall not be satisfied: they have gone a-whoring, and shall by no means prosper: because they have left off to take heed to the Lord.
The heart of my people has gladly engaged in fornication and wine and strong drink.
They asked counsel by means of signs, and they reported answer to them by their staves: they have gone astray in a spirit of whoredom, and gone grievously a-whoring from their God.
They have sacrificed on the tops of the mountains, and on the hills they have sacrificed under the oak and poplar, and under the shady tree, because the shade was good: therefore your daughters shall go a-whoring, and your daughters-in-law shall commit adultery.
And I will not visit upon your daughters when they shall commit fornication, nor your daughters-in-law when they shall commit adultery: for they themselves mingled themselves with harlots, and sacrificed with polluted ones, and the people that understood not entangled itself with a harlot.
But thou, O Israel, be not ignorant, and go ye not, men of Juda, to Galgala; and go not up to the house of On, and swear not by the living Lord.
For Israel was maddened like a mad heifer: now the Lord will feed them as a lamb in a wide place.
Ephraim, joined with idols, has laid stumbling-blocks in his own way.
He has chosen the Chananites: they have grievously gone a-whoring: they have loved dishonour through her insolence.
Thou art a blast of wind in her wings, and they shall be ashamed because of their altars.
And an angel of the Lord went up from Galgal to the place of weeping, and to Baethel, and to the house of Israel, and said to them, Thus says the Lord, I brought you up out of Egypt, and I brought you into the land which I sware to your fathers; and I said, I will never break my covenant that I have made with you.
And ye shall make no covenant with them that dwell in this land, neither shall ye worship their gods; but ye shall destroy their graven images, ye shall pull down their altars: but ye hearkened not to my voice, for ye did these things.
And I said, I will not drive them out from before you, but they shall be for a distress to you, and their gods shall be to you for an offence.
And it came to pass when the angel of the Lord spoke these words to all the children of Israel, that the people lifted up their voice, and wept.
And they named the name of that place Weepings; and they sacrificed there to the Lord.
And Joshua dismissed the people, and they went every man to his inheritance, to inherit the land.
And the people served the Lord all the days of Joshua, and all the days of the elders that lived many days with Joshua, as many as knew all the great work of the Lord, what things he had wrought in Israel.
And Joshua the son of Naue, the servant of the Lord, died, a hundred and ten years old.
And they buried him in the border of his inheritance, in Thamnathares, in mount Ephraim, on the north of the mountain of Gaas.
And all that generation were laid to their fathers: and another generation rose up after them, who knew not the Lord, nor yet the work which he wrought in Israel.
And the children of Israel wrought evil before the Lord, and served Baalim.
And they forsook the Lord God of their fathers, who brought them out of the land of Egypt, and walked after other gods, of the gods of the nations round about them; and they worshipped them.
And they provoked the Lord, and forsook him, and served Baal and the Astartes.
And the Lord was very angry with Israel; and he gave them into the hands of the spoilers, and they spoiled them; and he sold them into the hands of their enemies round about, and they could not any longer resist their enemies,
among whomsoever they went; and the hand of the Lord was against them for evil, as the Lord spoke, and as the Lord sware to them; and he greatly afflicted them.
And the Lord raised up judges, and the Lord save them out of the hands of them that spoiled them: and yet they hearkened not to the judges,
for they went a whoring after other gods, and worshipped them; and they turned quickly out of the way in which their fathers walked to hearken to the words of the Lord; they did not so.
And because the Lord raised them up judges, so the Lord was with the judge, and saved them out of the hand of their enemies all the days of the judge; for the Lord was moved at their groaning by reason of them that besieged them and afflicted them.
And it came to pass when the judge died, that they went back, and again corrupted themselves worse than their fathers to go after other gods to serve them an to worship them: they abandoned not their devices nor their stubborn ways.
And the Lord was very angry with Israel, and said, Forasmuch as this nation has forsaken my covenant which I commanded their fathers, and has not hearkened to my voice,
therefore I will not any more cast out a man of the nations before their face, which Joshua the son of Naue left in the land. And the Lord left them,
to prove Israel with them, whether they would keep the way of the Lord, to walk in it, as their fathers kept it, or no.
Bel has fallen, Nabo is broken to pieces, their graven images are gone to the wild beasts and the cattle: ye take them packed up as a burden to the weary, exhausted, hungry, and at the same time helpless man;
who will not be able to save themselves from war, but they themselves are led away captive.
Hear me, O house of Jacob, and all the remnant of Israel, who are borne by me from the womb, and taught by me from infancy, even to old age:
I am he; and until ye shall have grown old, I am he: I bear you, I have made, and I will relieve, I will take up and save you.
To whom have ye compared me? see, consider, ye that go astray.
They that furnish gold out of a purse, and silver by weight, will weigh it in a scale, and they hire a goldsmith and make idols, and bow down, and worship them.
They bear it upon the shoulder, and go; and if they put it upon its place, it remains, it cannot move: and whosoever shall cry to it, it cannot hear; it cannot save him from trouble.
Remember ye these things, and groan: repent, ye that have gone astray, return in your heart;
and remember the former things that were of old: for I am God, and there is none other beside me,
telling beforehand the latter events before they come to pass, and they are accomplished together: and I said, all my counsel shall stand, and I will do all things that I have planned:
calling a bird from the east, and from a land afar off, for the things which I have planned: I have spoken, and brought him; I have created and made him; I have brought him, and prospered his way.
Hearken to me, ye senseless ones, that are far from righteousness:
I have brought near my righteousness, and I will not be slow with the salvation that is from me: I have given salvation in Sion to Israel for glory.
But if I had gone with scorners, and if too my foot has hasted to deceit:
(for I am weighed in a just balance, and the Lord knows my innocence:)
if my foot has turned aside out of the way, or if mine heart has followed mine eye, and if too I have touched gifts with my hands;
then let me sow, and let others eat; and let me be uprooted on the earth.
If my heart has gone forth after another man's wife, and if I laid wait at her doors;
then let my wife also please another, and let my children be brought low.
For the rage of anger is not to be controlled, in the case of defiling another man's wife.
For it is a fire burning on every side, and whomsoever it attacks, it utterly destroys.
And if too I despised the judgment of my servant or my handmaid, when they pleaded with me;
what then shall I do if the Lord should try me? and if also he should at all visit me, can I make an answer?
Were not they too formed as I also was formed in the womb? yea, we were formed in the same womb.
But the helpless missed not whatever need they had, and I did not cause the eye of the widow to fail.
And if too I ate my morsel alone, and did not impart of it to the orphan;
And if too I overlooked the naked as he was perishing, and did not clothe him;
and if the poor did not bless me, and their shoulders were not warmed with the fleece of my lambs;
if I lifted my hand against an orphan, trusting that my strength was far superior to his:
let them my shoulder start from the blade-bone, and my arm be crushed off from the elbow.
For the fear of the Lord constrained me, and I cannot bear up by reason of his burden.
If I made gold my treasure, and if too I trusted the precious stone;
and if too I rejoiced when my wealth was abundant, and if too I laid my hand on innumerable treasures:
(do we not see the shining sun eclipsed, and the moon waning? for they have not power to continue:)
and if my heart was secretly deceived, and if I have laid my hand upon my mouth and kissed it:
let this also then be reckoned to me as the greatest iniquity: for I should have lied against the Lord Most High.
And if too I was glad at the fall of mine enemies, and mine heart said, Aha!
let then mine ear hear my curse, and let me be a byword among my people in my affliction.
And if too my handmaids have often said, Oh that we might be satisfied with his flesh; (whereas I was very kind:
for the stranger did not lodge without, and my door was opened to every one that came:)
or if too having sinned unintentionally, I hid my sin;
(for I did not stand in awe of a great multitude, so as not to declare boldly before them:) and if too I permitted a poor man to go out of my door with an empty bosom:
(Oh that I had a hearer,) and if I had not feared the hand of the Lord; and as to the written charge which I had against any one,
I would place it as a chaplet on my shoulders, and read it.
And if I did not read it and return it, having taken nothing from the debtor:
If at any time the land groaned against me, and if its furrows mourned together;
and if I ate its strength alone without price, and if I too grieved the heart of the owner of the soil, by taking aught from him:
then let the nettle come up to me instead of wheat, and a bramble instead of barley. And Job ceased speaking.
And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Go in to Pharao: for I have hardened his heart and the heart of his servants, that these signs may come upon them; in order
that ye may relate in the ears of your children, and to your children's children, in how many things I have mocked the Egyptians, and my wonders which I wrought among them; and ye shall know that I am the Lord.
And Moses and Aaron went in before Pharao, and they said to him, These things saith the Lord God of the Hebrews, How long dost thou refuse to reverence me? Send my people away, that they may serve me.
But if thou wilt not send my people away, behold, at this hour to-morrow I will bring an abundance of locusts upon all thy coasts.
And they shall cover the face of the earth, and thou shalt not be able to see the earth; and they shall devour all that is left of the abundance of the earth, which the hail has left you, and shall devour every tree that grows for you on the land.
And thy houses shall be filled, and the houses of thy servants, and all the houses in all the land of the Egyptians; things which thy fathers have never seen, nor their forefathers, from the day that they were upon the earth until this day. And Moses turned away and departed from Pharao.
And the servants of Pharao say to him, How long shall this be a snare to us? send away the men, that they may serve their God; wilt thou know that Egypt is destroyed?
And they brought back both Moses and Aaron to Pharao; and he said to them, Go and serve the Lord your God; but who are they that are going with you?
And Moses said, We will go with the young and the old, with our sons, and daughters, and sheep, and oxen, for it is a feast of the Lord.
And he said to them, So let the Lord be with you: as I will send you away, must I send away you store also? see that evil is attached to you.
Not so, but let the men go and serve God, for this ye yourselves seek; and they cast them out from the presence of Pharao.
And the Lord said to Moses, Stretch out thine hand over the land of Egypt, and let the locust come up on the land, and it shall devour every herb of the land, and all the fruit of the trees, which the hail left.
And Moses lifted up his rod towards heaven, and the Lord brought a south wind upon the earth, all that day and all that night: the morning dawned, and the south wind brought up the locusts,
and brought them up over all the land of Egypt. And they rested in very great abundance over all the borders of Egypt. Before them there were not such locusts, neither after them shall there be.
And they covered the face of the earth, and the land was wasted, and they devoured all the herbage of the land, and all the fruit of the trees, which was left by the hail: there was no green thing left on the trees, nor on all the herbage of the field, in all the land of Egypt.
And Pharao hasted to call Moses and Aaron, saying, I have sinned before the Lord your God, and against you;
pardon therefore my sin yet this time, and pray to the Lord your God, and let him take away from me this death.
And Moses went forth from Pharao, and prayed to God.
And the Lord brought in the opposite direction a strong wind from the sea, and took up the locusts and cast them into the Red Sea, and there was not one locust left in all the land of Egypt.
And the Lord hardened the heart of Pharao, and he did not send away the children of Israel.
And the Lord said to Moses, Stretch out thy hand to heaven, and let there be darkness over the land of Egyptdarkness that may be felt.
And Moses stretched out his hand to heaven, and there was darkness very black, even a storm over all the land of Egypt three days.
And for three days no man saw his brother, and no man rose up from his bed for three days: but all the children of Israel had light in all the places where they were.
And Pharao called Moses and Aaron, saying, Go, serve the Lord your God, only leave your sheep and your oxen, and let your store depart with you.
And Moses said, Nay, but thou shalt give to us whole burnt-offerings and sacrifices, which we will sacrifice to the Lord our God.
And our cattle shall go with us, and we will not leave a hoof behind, for of them we will take to serve the Lord our God: but we know not in what manner we shall serve the Lord our God, until we arrive there.
But the Lord hardened the heart of Pharao, and he would not let them go.
And Pharao says, Depart from me, beware of seeing my face again, for in what day thou shalt appear before me, thou shalt die.
And Moses says, Thou hast said, I will not appear in thy presence again.
Fret not thyself because of evil-doers, neither be envious of them that do iniquity.
For they shall soon be withered as the grass, and shall soon fall away as the green herbs.
Hope in the Lord, and do good; and dwell on the land, and thou shalt be fed with the wealth of it.
Delight thyself in the Lord; and he shall grant thee the requests of thine heart.
Disclose thy way to the Lord, and hope in him; and he shall bring it to pass.
And he shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy judgment as the noon-day.
Submit thyself to the Lord, and supplicate him: fret not thyself because of him that prospers in his way, at the man that does unlawful deeds.
ease from anger, and forsake wrath: fret not thyself so as to do evil.
For evil-doers shall be destroyed: but they that wait on the Lord, they shall inherit the land.
And yet a little while, and the sinner shall not be, and thou shalt seek for his place, and shalt not find it.
But the meek shall inherit the earth; and shall delight themselves in the abundance of peace.
The sinner will watch for the righteous, and gnash his teeth upon him.
But the Lord shall laugh at him: for he foresees that his day will come.
Sinners have drawn their swords, they have bent their bow, to cast down the poor and needy one, and to slay the upright in heart.
Let their sword enter into their own heart, and their bows be broken.
A little is better to the righteous than abundant wealth of sinners.
For the arms of sinners shall be broken; but the Lord supports the righteous.
The Lord knows the ways of the perfect; and their inheritance shall be for ever.
They shall not be ashamed in an evil time; and in days of famine they shall be satisfied.
For the sinners shall perish; and the enemies of the Lord at the moment of their being honoured and exalted have utterly vanished like smoke.
The sinner borrows, and will not pay again: but the righteous has compassion, and gives.
For they that bless him shall inherit the earth; and they that curse him shall be utterly destroyed.
The steps of a man are rightly ordered by the Lord: and he will take pleasure in his way.
When he falls, he shall not be ruined: for the Lord supports his hand.
I was once young, indeed I am now old; yet I have not seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed seeking bread.
He is merciful, and lends continually; and his seed shall be blessed.
Turn aside from evil, and do good; and dwell for ever.
For the Lord loves judgment, and will not forsake his saints; they shall be preserved for ever: the blameless shall be avenged, but the seed of the ungodly shall be utterly destroyed.
But the righteous shall inherit the earth, and dwell upon it for ever.
The mouth of the righteous will meditate wisdom, and his tongue will speak of judgment.
The law of his God is in his heart; and his steps shall not slide.
The sinner watches the righteous, and seeks to slay him.
But the Lord will not leave him in his hands, nor by any means condemn him when he is judged.
Wait on the Lord, and keep his way, and he shall exalt thee to inherit the land: when the wicked are destroyed, thou shalt see it.
I saw the ungodly very highly exalting himself, and lifting himself up like the cedars of Libanus.
Yet I passed by, and lo! he was not: and I sought him, but his place was not found.
Maintain innocence, and behold uprightness: for there is a remnant to the peaceable man.
But the transgressors shall be utterly destroyed together: the remnants of the ungodly shall be utterly destroyed.
But the salvation of the righteous is of the Lord; and he is their defender in the time of affliction.
And the Lord shall help them, and deliver them: and he shall rescue them from sinners, and save them, because they have hoped in him.
If Balac should give me his house full of silver and gold, I shall not be able to transgress the word of the Lord to make it good or bad by myself; whatsoever things God shall say, them will I speak.
And now, behold, I return to my place; come, I will advise thee of what this people shall do to thy people in the last days.
And he took up his parable and said, Balaam the son of Beor says, the man who sees truly says,
hearing the oracles of God, receiving knowledge from the Most High, and having seen a vision of God in sleep; his eyes were opened.
I will point to him, but not now; I bless him, but he draws not near: a star shall rise out of Jacob, a man shall spring out of Israel; and shall crush the princes of Moab, and shall spoil all the sons of Seth.
And Edom shall be an inheritance, and Esau his enemy shall be an inheritance of Israel, and Israel wrought valiantly.
And one shall arise out of Jacob, and destroy out of the city him that escapes.
And having seen Amalec, he took up his parable and said, Amalec is the first of the nations; yet his seed shall perish.
And having seen the Kenite, he took up his parable and said, thy dwelling-place is strong; yet though thou shouldest put thy nest in a rock,
and though Beor should have a skillfully contrived hiding-place, the Assyrians shall carry thee away captive.
And he looked upon Og, and took up his parable and said, Oh, oh, who shall live, when God shall do these things?
And one shall come forth from the hands of the Citians, and shall afflict Assur, and shall afflict the Hebrews, and they shall perish together.
And Balaam rose up and departed and returned to his place, and Balac went to his own home.
Pestilent flies will corrupt a preparation of sweet ointment: and a little wisdom is more precious than great glory of folly.
A wise man's heart is at his right hand; but a fool's heart at his left.
Yea, and whenever a fool walks by the way, his heart will fail him, and all that he thinks of is folly.
If the spirit of the ruler rise up against thee, leave not thy place; for soothing will put an end to great offences.
There is an evil which I have seen under the sun, wherein an error has proceeded from the ruler.
The fool has been set in very high places, while rich men would sit in a low one.
I have seen servants upon horses, and princes walking as servants on the earth.
He that digs a pit shall fall into it; and him that breaks down a hedge a serpent shall bite.
He that removes stones shall be troubled thereby; he that cleaves wood shall be endangered thereby.
If the axe-head should fall off, then the man troubles his countenance, and he must put forth more strength: and in that case skill is of no advantage to a man.
If a serpent bite when there is no charmer's whisper, then there is no advantage to the charmer.
The words of a wise mouth are gracious: but the lips of a fool will swallow him up.
The beginning of the words of his mouth is folly: and the end of his talk mischievous madness.
A fool moreover multiplies words: man knows not what has been, nor what will be: who shall tell him what will come after him?
The labour of fools will afflict them, as that of one who knows not to go to the city.
Woe to thee, O city, whose king is young, and thy princes eat in the morning!
Blessed art thou, O land, whose king is a son of nobles, and whose princes shall eat seasonably, for strength, and shall not be ashamed.
By slothful neglect a building will be brought low: and by idleness of the hands the house will fall to pieces.
Men prepare bread for laughter, and wine and oil that the living should rejoice: but to money all things will humbly yield obedience.
Even in thy conscience, curse not the king; and curse not the rich in thy bedchamber: for a bird of the air shall carry thy voice, and that which has wings shall report thy speech.
Thus saith the Lord, Of what kind is your mother's bill of divorcement, by which I put her away? or to which debtor have I sold you? Behold, ye are sold for your sins, and for your iniquities have I put your mother away.
Why did I come, and there was no man? why did I call, and there was none to hearken? Is not my hand strong to redeem? or can I not deliver? behold, by my rebuke I will dry up the sea, and make rivers a wilderness; and their fish shall be dried up because there is no water, and shall die for thirst.
I will clothe the sky with darkness, and will make its covering as sackcloth.
The Lord even God gives me the tongue of instruction, to know when it is fit to speak a word: he has appointed for me early, he has given me an ear to hear:
and the instruction of the Lord, even the Lord, opens mine ears, and I do not disobey, nor dispute.
I gave my back to scourges, and my cheeks to blows; and I turned not away my face from the shame of spitting:
but the Lord God became my helper; therefore I was not ashamed, but I set my face as a solid rock; and I know that I shall never be ashamed,
for he that has justified me draws near; who is he that pleads with me? let him stand up against me at the same time: yea, who is he that pleads with me? let him draw nigh to me.
Behold, the Lord, the Lord, will help me; who will hurt me? behold, all ye shall wax old as a garment, and a moth shall devour you.
Who is among you that fears the Lord? let him hearken to the voice of his servant: ye that walk in darkness, and have no light, trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon God.
Behold, ye all kindle a fire, and feed a flame: walk in the light of your fire, and in the flame which ye have kindled. This has happened to you for my sake; ye shall lie down in sorrow.
O Lord, the king shall rejoice in thy strength; and in thy salvation he shall greatly exult.
Thou hast granted him the desire of his soul, and hast not withheld from him the request of his lips. Pause.
For thou hast prevented him with blessings of goodness: thou has set upon his head a crown of precious stone.
He asked life of thee, and thou gavest him length of days for ever and ever.
His glory is great in thy salvation: thou wilt crown him with glory and majesty.
For thou wilt give him a blessing for ever and ever: thou wilt gladden him with joy with thy countenance.
For the king trusts in the Lord, and through the mercy of the Highest he shall not be moved.
Let thy hand be found by all thine enemies: let thy right hand find all that hate thee.
Thou shalt make them as a fiery oven at the time of thy presence: the Lord shall trouble them in his anger, and fire shall devour them.
Thou shalt destroy their fruit from the earth, and their seed from among the sons of men.
For they intended evils against thee; they imagined a device which they shall by no means be able to perform.
For thou shalt make them turn their back in thy latter end, thou wilt prepare their face.
Be thou exalted, O Lord, in thy strength: we will sing and praise thy mighty acts.
And the Lord said to Moses, Now thou shalt see what I will do to Pharao; for he shall send them forth with a mighty hand, and with a high arm shall he cast them out of his land.
And God spoke to Moses and said to him, I am the Lord.
And I appeared to Abraam and Isaac and Jacob, being their God, but I did not manifest to them my name Lord.
And I established my covenant with them, to give them the land of the Chananites, the land wherein they sojourned, in which also they dwelt as strangers.
And I hearkened to the groaning of the children of Israel (the affliction with which the Egyptians enslave them) and I remembered the covenant with you.
Go, speak to the children of Israel, saying, I am the Lord; and I will lead you forth from the tyranny of the Egyptians, and I will deliver you from bondage, and I will ransom you with a high arm, and great judgment.
And I will take you to me a people for myself, and will be your God; and ye shall know that I am the Lord your God, who brought you out from the tyranny of the Egyptians.
And I will bring you into the land concerning which I stretched out my hand to give it to Abraam and Isaac and Jacob, and I will give it you for an inheritance: I am the Lord.
And Moses spoke thus to the sons of Israel, and they hearkened not to Moses for faint-heartedness, and for their hard tasks.
And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying,
Go in, speak to Pharao king of Egypt, that he send forth the children of Israel out of his land.
And Moses spoke before the Lord, saying, Behold, the children of Israel hearkened not to me, and how shall Pharao hearken to me? and I am not eloquent.
And the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, and gave them a charge to Pharao king of Egypt, that he should send forth the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt.
And these are the heads of the houses of their families: the sons of Ruben the first-born of Israel; Enoch and Phallus, Asron, and Charmi, this is the kindred of Ruben.
And the sons of Symeon, Jemuel and Jamin, and Aod, and Jachin and Saar, and Saul the son of a Phoenician woman, these are the families of the sons of Symeon.
And these are the names of the sons of Levi according to their kindreds, Gedson, Caath, and Merari; and the years of the life of Levi were a hundred and thirty-seven.
And these are the sons of Gedson, Lobeni and Semei, the houses of their family. And the sons of Caath,
Ambram and Issaar, Chebron, and Oziel; and the years of the life of Caath were a hundred and thirty-three years.
And the sons of Merari, Mooli, and Omusi, these are the houses of the families of Levi, according to their kindreds.
And Ambram took to wife Jochabed the daughter of his father's brother, and she bore to him both Aaron and Moses, and Mariam their sister: and the years of the life of Ambram were a hundred and thirty-two years.
And the sons of Issaar, Core, and Naphec, and Zechri.
And the sons of Oziel, Misael, and Elisaphan, and Segri.
And Aaron took to himself to wife Elisabeth daughter of Aminadab sister of Naasson, and she bore to him both Nadab and Abiud, and Eleazar and Ithamar.
And the sons of Core, Asir, and Elkana, and Abiasar, these are the generations of Core.
And Eleazar the son of Aaron took to himself for a wife one of the daughters of Phutiel, and she bore to him Phinees. These are the heads of the family of the Levites, according to their generations.
This is Aaron and Moses, whom God told to bring out the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt with their forces.
These are they that spoke with Pharao king of Egypt, and Aaron himself and Moses brought out the children of Israel from the land of Egypt,
in the day in which the Lord spoke to Moses in the land of Egypt;
then the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, I am the Lord: speak to Pharao king of Egypt whatsoever I say to thee.
And Moses said before the Lord, Behold, I am not able in speech, and how shall Pharao hearken to me?
And Job further continued and said in his parable,
As God lives, who has thus judge me; and the Almighty, who has embittered my soul;
verily, while my breath is yet in me, and the breath of God which remains to me is in my nostrils,
my lips shall not speak evil words, neither shall my soul meditate unrighteous thoughts.
Far be it from me that I should justify you till I die; for I will not let go my innocence,
but keeping fast to my righteousness I will by no means let it go: for I am not conscious to myself of having done any thing amiss.
Nay rather, but let mine enemies be as the overthrow of the ungodly, and they that rise up against me, as the destruction of transgressors.
For what is the hope of the ungodly, that he holds to it? will he indeed trust in the Lord and be saved?
Will God hear his prayer? or, when distress has come upon him,
has he any confidence before him? or will God hear him as he calls upon him?
Yet now I will tell you what is in the hand of the Lord: I will not lie concerning the things which are with the Almighty.
Behold, ye all know that ye are adding vanity to vanity.
This is the portion of an ungodly man from the Lord, and the possession of oppressors shall come upon them from the Almighty.
And if their children be many, they shall be for slaughter: and if they grow up, they shall beg.
And they that survive of him shall utterly perish, and no one shall pity their widows.
Even if he should gather silver as earth, and prepare gold as clay;
All these things shall the righteous gain, and the truehearted shall possess his wealth.
And his house is gone like moths, and like a spider's web.
The rich man shall lie down, and shall not continue: he has opened his eyes, and he is not.
Pains have come upon him as water, and darkness has carried him away by night.
And Samuel died, and all Israel assembled, and bewailed him, and they bury him in his house in Armathaim: and David arose, and went down to the wilderness of Maon.
And there was a man in Maon, and his flocks were in Carmel, and he was a very great man; and he had three thousand sheep, and a thousand she-goats: and he happened to be shearing his flock in Carmel.
And the man's name was Nabal, and his wife's name was Abigaia: and his wife was of good understanding and very beautiful in person: but the man was harsh, and evil in his doings, and the man was churlish.
And David heard in the wilderness, that Nabal the Carmelite was shearing his sheep.
And David sent ten young men, and he said to the young men, Go up to Carmel, and go to Nabal, and ask him in my name how he is.
And thus shall ye say, May thou and thy house seasonably prosper, and all thine be in prosperity.
And now, behold, I have heard that thy shepherds who were with is in the wilderness are shearing thy sheep, and we hindered them not, neither did we demand any thing from them all the time they were in Carmel.
Ask thy servants, and they will tell thee. Let then thy servants find grace in thine eyes, for we are come on a good day; give we pray thee, whatsoever thy hand may find, to thy son David.
So the servants come and speak these words to Nabal, according to all these words in the name of David.
And Nabal sprang up, and answered the servants of David, and said, Who is David? and who is the son of Jessae? Now-a-days there is abundance of servants who depart every one from his master.
And shall I take my bread, and my wine, and my beasts that I have slain for my shearers, and shall I give them to men of whom I know not whence they are?
So the servants of David turned back, and returned, and came and reported to David according to these words.
And David said to his men, Gird on every man his sword. And they went up after David, about four hundred men: and two hundred abode with the stuff.
And one of the servants reported to Abigaia the wife of Nabal, saying, Behold, David sent messengers out of the wilderness to salute our lord; but he turned away from them.
And the men were very good to us; they did not hinder us, neither did they demand from us any thing all the days that we were with them.
And when we were in the field, they were as a wall round about us, both by night and by day, all the days that we were with them feeding the flock.
And now do thou consider, and see what thou wilt do; for mischief is determined against our lord and against his house; and he is a vile character, and one cannot speak to him.
And Abigaia hasted, and took two hundred loaves, and two vessels of wine, and five sheep ready dressed, and five ephahs of fine flour, and one homer of dried grapes, and two hundred cakes of figs, and put them upon asses.
And she said to her servants, Go on before me, and behold I come after you: but she told not her husband.
And it came to pass when she had mounted her ass and was going down by the covert of the mountain, behold, David and his men came down to meet her, and she met them.
And David said, Perhaps I have kept all his possessions in the wilderness that he should wrong me, and we did not order the taking anything of all his goods; yet he has rewarded me evil for good.
So God do to David and more also, if I leave one male of all that belong to Nabal until the morning.
And Abigaia saw David, and she hasted and alighted from her ass; and she felt before David on her face, and did obeisance to him, bowing to the ground
even to his feet, and said, On me, my lord, be my wrong: let, I pray thee, thy servant speak in thine ears, and hear thou the words of thy servant.
Let not my lord, I pray thee, take to heart this pestilent man, for according to his name, so is he; Nabal is his name, and folly is with him: but I thy handmaid saw not the servants of my lord whom thou didst send.
And now, my lord, as the Lord lives, and thy soul lives, as the Lord has kept thee from coming against innocent blood, and from executing vengeance for thyself, now therefore let thine enemies, and those that seek evil against my lord, become as Nabal.
And now accept this token of goodwill, which thy servant has brought to my lord, and thou shalt give it to the servants that wait on my lord.
Remove, I pray thee, the trespass of thy servant; for the Lord will surely make for my lord a sure house, for the Lord fights the battles of my lord, and there shall no evil be ever found in thee.
And if a man shall rise up persecuting thee and seeking thy life, yet shall the life of my lord be bound up in the bundle of life with the Lord God, and thou shalt whirl the life of thine enemies as in the midst of a sling.
And it shall be when the Lord shall have wrought for my lord all the good things he has spoken concerning thee, and shall appoint thee to be ruler over Israel;
then this shall not be an abomination and offence to my lord, to have shed innocent blood without cause, and for my lord to have avenged himself: and so may the Lord do good to my lord, and thou shalt remember thine handmaid to do her good.
And David said to Abigaia, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who sent thee this very day to meet me:
and blessed be thy conduct, and blessed be thou, who hast hindered me this very day from coming to shed blood, and from avenging myself.
But surely as the Lord God of Israel lives, who hindered me this day from doing thee harm, if thou hadst not hasted and come to meet me, then I said, There shall surely not be left to Nabal till the morning one male.
And David took of her hand all that she brought to him, and said to her, Go in peace to thy house: see, I have hearkened to thy voice, and accepted thy petition.
And Abigaia came to Nabal: and, behold, he had a banquet in this house, as the banquet of a king, and the heart of Nabal was merry within him, and he was very drunken: and she told him nothing great or small till the morning light.
And it came to pass in the morning, when Nabal recovered from his wine, his wife told him these words; and his heart died within him, and he became as a stone.
And it came to pass after about ten days, that the Lord smote Nabal, and he died.
And David heard it and said, Blessed be the Lord, who has judged the cause of my reproach at the hand of Nabal, and has delivered his servant from the power of evil; and the Lord has returned the mischief of Nabal upon his own head. And David sent and spoke concerning Abigaia, to take her to himself for a wife.
So the servants of David came to Abigaia to Carmel, and spoke to her, saying, David has sent us to thee, to take thee to himself for a wife.
And she arose, and did reverence with her face to the earth, and said, Behold, thy servant is for an handmaid to wash the feet of thy servants.
And Abigaia arose, and mounted her ass, and five damsels followed her: and she went after the servants of David, and became his wife.
And David took Achinaam out of Jezrael, and they were both his wives.
And Saul gave Melchol his daughter, David's wife, to Phalti the son of Amis who was of Romma.
There is an evil which I have seen under the sun, and it is abundant with man:
a man to whom God shall give wealth, and substance, and honour, and he wants nothing for his soul of all things that he shall desire, yet God shall not give him power to eat of it, for a stranger shall devour it: this is vanity, and an evil infirmity.
If a man beget a hundred children, and live many years, yea, however abundant the days of his years shall be, yet if his soul shall not be satisfied with good, and also he have no burial; I said, An untimely birth is better than he.
For he came in vanity, and departs in darkness, and his name shall be covered in darkness.
Moreover he has not seen the sun, nor known rest: there is no more rest to this one than another.
Though he has lived to the return of a thousand years, yet he has seen no good: do not all go to one place?
All the labour of a man is for his mouth, and yet the appetite shall not be satisfied.
For what advantage has the wise man over the fool, since even the poor knows how to walk in the direction of life?
The sight of the eyes is better than that which wanders in soul: this is also vanity, and waywardness of spirit.
If anything has been, its name has already been called: and it is known what man is; neither can he contend with him who is stronger than he.
For there are many things which increase vanity.
Surely these men who came up out of Egypt from twenty years old and upward, who know good and evil, shall not see the land which I sware to give to Abraam and Isaac and Jacob, for they have not closely followed after me:
save Caleb the son of Jephonne, who was set apart, and Joshua the son of Naue, for they closely followed after the Lord.
And the Lord was very angry with Israel; and for forty years he caused them to wander in the wilderness, until all the generation which did evil in the sight of the Lord was extinct.
Behold, ye are risen up in the room of your fathers, a combination of sinful men, to increase yet farther the fierce wrath of the Lord against Israel.
For ye will turn away from him to desert him yet once more in the wilderness, and ye will sin against this whole congregation.
And they came to him, and said, We will build here folds for our cattle, and cities for our possessions;
and we will arm ourselves and go as an advanced guard before the children of Israel, until we shall have brought them into their place; and our possessions shall remain in walled cities because of the inhabitants of the land.
We will not return to our houses till the children of Israel shall have been distributed, each to his own inheritance.
And we will not any longer inherit with them from the other side of Jordan and onwards, because we have our full inheritance on the side beyond Jordan eastward.
And Moses said to them, If ye will do according to these words, if ye will arm yourselves before the Lord for battle,
and every one of you will pass over Jordan fully armed before the Lord, until his enemy be destroyed from before his face,
and the land shall be subdued before the Lord, then afterwards ye shall return, and be guiltless before the Lord, and as regards Israel; and this land shall be to you for a possession before the Lord.
But if ye will not do so, ye will sin against the Lord; and ye shall know your sin, when afflictions shall come upon you.
And ye shall build for yourselves cities for your store, and folds for your cattle; and ye shall do that which proceeds out of your mouth.
And the sons of Ruben and the sons of Gad spoke to Moses, saying, Thy servants will do as our lord commands.
Our store, and our wives, and all our cattle shall be in the cities of Galaad.
But thy servants will go over all armed and set in order before the Lord to battle, as our lord says.
And Moses appointed to them for judges Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the son of Naue, and the chiefs of the families of the tribes of Israel.
And Moses said to them, If the sons of Ruben and the sons of Gad will pass over Jordan with you, every one armed for war before the Lord, and ye shall subdue the land before you, then ye shall give to them the land of Galaad for a possession.
But if they will not pass over armed with you to war before the Lord, then shall ye cause to pass over their possessions and their wives and their cattle before you into the land of Chanaan, and they shall inherit with you in the land of Chanaan.
And the sons of Ruben and the sons of Gad answered, saying, Whatsoever the Lord says to his servants, that will we do.
We will go over armed before the Lord into the land of Chanaan, and ye shall give us our inheritance beyond Jordan.
And Moses gave to them, even to the sons of Gad and the sons of Ruben, and to the half tribe of Manasse of the sons of Joseph, the kingdom of Seon king of the Amorites, and the kingdom of Og king of Basan, the land and its cities with its coasts, the cities of the land round about.
And the sons of Gad built Daebon, and Ataroth, and Aroer,
and Sophar, and Jazer, and they set them up,
and Namram, and Baetharan, strong cities, and folds for sheep.
And the sons of Ruben built Esebon, and Eleale, and Kariatham,
and Beelmeon, surrounded with walls, and Sebama; and they called the names of the cities which they built, after their own names.
And a son of Machir the son of Manasse went to Galaad, and took it, and destroyed the Amorite who dwelt in it.
And Moses gave Galaad to Machir the son of Manasse, and he dwelt there.
And Jair the son of Manasse went and took their villages, and called them the villages of Jair.
And Nabau went and took Caath and her villages, and called them Naboth after his name.
The Lord reigns; let the people rage; it is he that sits upon the cherubs, let the earth be moved.
The Lord is great in Sion, and is high over all the people.
Let them give thanks to thy great name; for it is terrible and holy.
And the king's honour loves judgment; thou hast prepared equity, thou hast wrought judgment and justice in Jacob.
Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship at his footstool; for he is holy.
Moses and Aaron among his priests, and Samuel among them that call upon his name; they called upon the Lord, and he heard them.
He spoke to them in a pillar of cloud; they kept his testimonies, and the ordinances which he gave them.
O Lord our God, thou heardest them; O God, thou becamest propitious to them, though thou didst take vengeance on all their devices.
Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship at his holy mountain; for the Lord our God is holy.
See now! what is so good, or what so pleasant, as for brethren to dwell together?
It is as ointment on the head, that ran down to the beard, even the beard of Aaron; that ran down to the fringe of his clothing.
As the dew of Aermon, that comes down on the mountains of Sion: for there, the Lord commanded the blessing, even life for ever.
And it came to pass in the days of Achaz the son of Joatham, the son of Ozias, king of Juda, there came up Rasim king of Aram, and Phakee son of Romelias, king of Israel, against Jerusalem to war against it, but they could not take it.
And a message was brought to the house of David, saying, Aram has conspired with Ephraim. And his soul was amazed, and the soul of his people, as in a wood a tree is moved by the wind.
And the Lord said to Esaias, Go forth to meet Achaz, thou, and thy son Jasub who is left, to the pool of the upper way of the fuller's field.
And thou shalt say to him, Take care to be quiet, and fear not, neither let thy soul be disheartened because of these two smoking firebrands: for when my fierce anger is over, I will heal again.
And as for the son of Aram, and the son of Romelias, forasmuch as they have devised an evil counsel, saying,
We will go up against Judea, and having conferred with them we will turn them away to our side, and we will make the son of Tabeel king of it;
thus saith the Lord of hosts, This counsel shall not abide, nor come to pass.
But the head of Aram is Damascus, and the head of Damascus, Rasim; and yet within sixty and five years the kingdom of Ephraim shall cease from being a people.
And the head of Ephraim is Somoron, and the head of Somoron the son of Romelias: but if ye believe not, neither will ye at all understand.
And the Lord again spoke to Achaz, saying,
Ask for thyself a sign of the Lord thy God, in the depth or in the height.
And Achaz said, I will not ask, neither will I tempt the Lord.
And he said, Hear ye now, O house of David; is it a little thing for you to contend with men? and how do ye contend against the Lord?
Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign; behold, a virgin shall conceive in the womb, and shall bring forth a son, and thou shalt call his name Emmanuel.
Butter and honey shall he eat, before he knows either to prefer evil or choose the good.
For before the child shall know good or evil, he refuses evil, to choose the good; and the land shall be forsaken which thou art afraid of because of the two kings.
But God shall bring upon thee, and upon thy people, and upon the house of thy father, days which have never come, from the day that Ephraim took away from Juda the king of the Assyrians.
And it shall come to pass in that day that the Lord shall hiss for the flies, which insect shall rule over a part of the river of Egypt, and for the bee which is in the land of the Assyrians.
And they all shall enter into the clefts of the land, and into the holes of the rocks, and into the caves, and into every ravine.
In that day the Lord shall shave with the hired razor of the king of Assyria beyond the river the head, and the hairs of the feet, and will remove the beard.
And it shall come to pass in that day, that a man shall rear a heifer, and two sheep.
And it shall come to pass from their drinking an abundance of milk, that every one that is left on the land shall eat butter and honey.
And it shall come to pass in that day, for every place where there shall be a thousand vines at a thousand shekels, they shall become barren land and thorns.
Men shall enter thither with arrow and bow; for all the land shall be barren ground and thorns.
And every mountain shall be certainly ploughed: there shall no fear come thither: for there shall be from among the barren ground and thorns that whereon cattle shall feed and oxen shall tread.
Give heed, O my people, to my law: incline your ear to the words of my mouth.
I will open my mouth in parables: I will utter dark sayings which have been from the beginning.
All which we have heard and known, and our fathers have declared to us.
They were not hid from their children to a second generations; the fathers declaring the praises of the Lord, and his mighty acts, and his wonders which he wrought.
And he raised up a testimony in Jacob, and appointed a law in Israel, which he commanded our fathers, to make it known to their children:
that another generation might know, even the sons which should be born; and they should arise and declare them to their children.
That they might set their hope on God, and not forget the works of God, but diligently seek his commandments.
That they should not be as their fathers, a perverse and provoking generation; a generation which set not its heart aright, and its spirit was not steadfast with God.
The children of Ephraim, bending and shooting with the bow, turned back in the day of battle.
They kept not the covenant of God, and would not walk in his law.
And they forgot his benefits, and his miracles which he had shewed them;
the miracles which he wrought before their fathers, in the land of Egypt, in the plain of Tanes.
He clave the sea, and led them through: he made the waters to stand as in a bottle.
And he guided them with a cloud by day, and all the night with a light of fire.
he clave a rock in the wilderness, and made them drink as in a great deep.
And he brought water out of the rock, and caused waters to flow down as rivers.
And they sinned yet more against him; they provoked the Most High in the wilderness.
And they tempted God in their hearts, in asking meat for the desire of their souls.
They spoke also against God, and said, Will God be able to prepare a table in the wilderness?
Forasmuch as he smote the rock, and the waters flowed, and the torrents ran abundantly; will he be able also to give bread, or prepare a table for his people?
Therefore the Lord heard, and was provoked: and fire was kindled in Jacob, and wrath went up against Israel.
Because they believed not in God, and trusted not in his salvation.
Yet he commanded the clouds from above, and opened the doors of heaven,
and rained upon them manna to eat, and gave them the bread of heaven.
Man ate angels' bread; he sent them provision to the full.
He removed the south wind from heaven; and by his might he brought in the south-west wind.
And he rained upon them flesh like dust, and feathered birds like the sand of the seas.
And they fell into the midst of their camp, round about their tents.
So they ate, and were completely filled; and he gave them their desire.
They were not disappointed of their desire: but when their food was yet in their mouth,
then the indignation of God rose up against them, and slew the fattest of them, and overthrew the choice men of Israel.
In the midst of all this they sinned yet more, and believed not his miracles.
And their days were consumed in vanity, and their years with anxiety.
When he slew them, they sought him: and they returned and called betimes upon God.
And they remembered that God was their helper, and the most high God was their redeemer.
Yet they loved him only with their mouth, and lied to him with their tongue.
For their heart was not right with him, neither were they steadfast in his covenant.
But he is compassionate, and will forgive their sins, and will not destroy them: yea, he will frequently turn away his wrath, and will not kindle all his anger.
And he remembered that they are flesh; a wind that passes away, and returns not.
How often did they provoke him in the wilderness, and anger him in a dry land!
Yea, they turned back, and tempted God, and provoked the Holy One of Israel.
They remembered not his hand, the day in which he delivered them from the hand of the oppressor.
How he had wrought his signs in Egypt, and his wonders in the field of Tanes:
and had changed their rivers into blood; and their streams, that they should not drink.
He sent against them the dog-fly, and it devoured them; and the frog, and it spoiled them.
And he gave their fruit to the canker worm, and their labours to the locust.
He killed their vines with hail, and their sycamores with frost.
And he gave up their cattle to hail, and their substance to the fire.
He sent out against them the fury of his anger, wrath, and indignation, and affliction, a message by evil angels.
He made a way for his wrath; he spared not their souls from death, but consigned their cattle to death;
and smote every first-born in the land of Egypt; the first-fruits of their labours in the tents of Cham.
And he removed his people like sheep; he led them as a flock in the wilderness.
And he guided them with hope, and they feared not: but the sea covered their enemies.
And he brought them in to the mountain of his sanctuary, this mountain which his right hand had purchased.
And he cast out the nations from before them, and made them to inherit by a line of inheritance, and made the tribes of Israel to dwell in their tents.
Yet they tempted and provoked the most high God, and kept not his testimonies.
And they turned back, and broke covenant, even as also their fathers: they became like a crooked bow.
And they provoked him with their high places, and moved him to jealousy with their graven images.
God heard and lightly regarded them, and greatly despised Israel.
And he rejected the tabernacle of Selom, his tent where he dwelt among men.
And he gave their strength into captivity, and their beauty into the enemy's hand.
And he gave his people to the sword; and disdained his inheritance.
Fire devoured their young men; and their virgins mourned not.
Their priests fell by the sword; and their widows shall not be wept for.
So the Lord awaked as one out of sleep, and as a mighty man who has been heated with wine.
And he smote his enemies in the hinder parts: he brought on them a perpetual reproach.
And he rejected the tabernacle of Joseph, and chose not the tribe of Ephraim;
but chose the tribe of Juda, the mount Sion which he loved.
And he built his sanctuary as the place of unicorns; he founded it for ever on the earth.
He chose David also his servant, and took him up from the flocks of sheep.
He took him from following the ewes great with young, to be the shepherd of Jacob his servant, and Israel his inheritance.
So he tended them in the innocency of his heart; and guided them by the skillfulness of his hands.
And it came to pass after this that the king of the children of Ammon died, and Annon his son reigned in his stead.
And David said, I will shew mercy to Annon the son of Naas, as his father dealt mercifully with me. And David sent to comfort him concerning his father by the hand of his servants; and the servants of David came into the land of the children of Ammon.
And the princes of the children of Ammon said to Annon their lord, Is it to honour thy father before thee that David has sent comforters to thee? Has not David rather sent his servants to thee that they should search the city, and spy it out and examine it?
And Annon took the servants of David, and shaved their beards, and cut off their garments in the midst as far as their haunches, and sent them away.
And they brought David word concerning the men; and he sent to meet them, for the men were greatly dishonoured: and the king said, Remain in Jericho till your beards have grown, and then ye shall return.
And the children of Ammon saw that the people of David were ashamed; and the children of Ammon sent, and hired the Syrians of Baethraam, and the Syrians of Suba, and Roob, twenty thousand footmen, and the king of Amalec with a thousand men, and Istob with twelve thousand men.
And David heard, and sent Joab and all his host, even the mighty men.
And the children of Ammon went forth, and set the battle in array by the door of the gate: those of Syria, Suba, and Roob, and Istob, and Amalec, being by themselves in the field.
And Joab saw that the front of the battle was against him from that which was opposed in front and from behind, and he chose out some of all the young men of Israel, and they set themselves in array against Syria.
And the rest of the people he gave into the hand of Abessa his brother, and they set the battle in array opposite to the children of Ammon.
And he said, If Syria be too strong for me, then shall ye help me: and if the children of Ammon be too strong for thee, then will we be ready to help thee.
Be thou courageous, and let us be strong for our people, and for the sake of the cities of our God, and the Lord shall do that which is good in his eyes.
And Joab and his people with him advanced to battle against Syria, and they fled from before him.
And the children of Ammon saw that the Syrians were fled, and they fled from before Abessa, and entered into the city: and Joab returned from the children of Ammon, and came to Jerusalem.
And the Syrians saw that they were worsted before Israel, and they gathered themselves together.
And Adraazar sent and gathered the Syrians from the other side of the river Chalamak, and they came to Aelam; and Sobac the captain of the host of Adraazar was at their head.
And Syria fled from before Israel, and David destroyed of Syria seven hundred chariots, and forty thousand horsemen, and he smote Sobac the captain of his host, and he died there.
And all the kings the servants of Adraazar saw that they were put to the worse before Israel, and they went over to Israel, and served them: and Syria was afraid to help the children of Ammon any more.
And Sampson went down to Thamnatha, and saw a woman in Thamnatha of the daughters of the Philistines.
And he went up and told his father and his mother, and said, I have seen a woman in Thamnatha of the daughters of the Phylistines; and now take her to me for a wife.
And his father and his mother said to him, Are there no daughters of thy brethren, and is there not a woman of all my people, that thou goest to take a wife of the uncircumcised Philistines? And Sampson said to his father, Take her for me, for she is right in my eyes.
And his father and his mother knew not that it was of the Lord, that he sought to be revenged on the Philistines: and at that time the Philistines lorded it over Israel.
And Sampson and his father and his mother went down to Thamnatha, and he came to the vineyard of Thamnatha; and behold, a young lion roared in meeting him.
And the spirit of the Lord came powerfully upon him, and he crushed him as he would have crushed a kid of the goats, and there was nothing in his hands: and he told not his father and his mother what he had done.
And they went down and spoke to the woman, and she was pleasing in the eyes of Sampson.
And after some time he returned to take her, and he turned aside to see the carcase of the lion; and behold, a swarm of bees, and honey were in the mouth of the lion.
And he took it into his hands, and went on eating, and he went to his father and his mother, and gave to them, and they did eat; but he told them not that he took the honey out of the mouth of the lion.
And his father went down to the woman, and Sampson made there a banquet for seven days, for so the young men are used to do.
And it came to pass when they saw him, that they took thirty guests, and they were with him.
And Sampson said to them, I propound you a riddle: if ye will indeed tell it me, and discover it within the seven days of the feast, I will you give thirty sheets and thirty changes of raiment.
And if ye cannot tell it me, ye shall give me thirty napkins and thirty changes of apparel: and they said to him, Propound thy riddle, and we will hear it.
And he said to them, Meat came forth of the eater, and sweetness out of the strong: and they could not tell the riddle for three days.
And it came to pass on the fourth day, that they said to the wife of Sampson, Deceive now thy husband, and let him tell thee the riddle, lest we burn thee and thy father's house with fire: did ye invite us to do us violence?
And Sampson's wife wept before him, and said, Thou dost but hate me, and lovest me not; for the riddle which thou hast propounded to the children of my people thou hast not told me: and Sampson said to her, If I have not told it to my father and my mother, shall I tell it to thee?
And she wept before him the seven days, during which their banquet lasted: and it came to pass on the seventh day, that he told her, because she troubled him; and she told it to the children of her people.
And the men of the city said to him on the seventh day, before sunrise, What is sweeter than honey? and what is stronger than a lion? and Sampson said to them, If ye had not ploughed with my heifer, ye would not have known my riddle.
And the Spirit of the Lord came upon him powerfully, and he went down to Ascalon, and destroyed of the inhabitants thirty men, and took their garments, and gave the changes of raiment to them that told the riddle; and Sampson was very angry, and went up to the house of his father.
And the wife of Sampson was given to one of his friends, with whom he was on terms of friendship.
And it came to pass on the eighth day, that Moses called Aaron and his sons, and the elders of Israel,
and Moses said to Aaron, Take to thyself a young calf of the herd for a sin-offering, and a ram for a whole-burnt-offering, unblemished, and offer them before the Lord.
And speak to the elders of Israel, saying, Take one kid of the goats for a sin-offering, and a young calf, and a lamb of a year old for a whole-burnt-offering, spotless,
and a calf and a ram for a peace offering before the Lord, and fine flour mingled with oil, for to-day the Lord will appear among you.
And they took as Moses commanded them before the tabernacle of witness, and all the congregation drew nigh, and they stood before the Lord.
And Moses said, This is the thing which the Lord has spoken; do it, and the glory of the Lord shall appear among you.
And Moses said to Aaron, Draw nigh to the altar, and offer thy sin-offering, and thy whole-burnt-offering, and make atonement for thyself, and for thy house; and offer the gifts of the people, and make atonement for them, as the Lord commanded Moses.
And Aaron drew nigh to the altar, and slew the calf of his sin-offering.
And the sons of Aaron brought the blood to him, and he dipped his finger into the blood, and put it on the horns of the altar, and he poured out the blood at the bottom of the altar.
And he offered up on the altar the fat and the kidneys and the lobe of the liver of the sin-offering, according as the Lord commanded Moses.
And the flesh and the hide he burnt with fire outside of the camp.
And he slew the whole-burnt-offering; and the sons of Aaron brought the blood to him, and he poured it on the altar round about.
And they brought the whole-burnt-offering, according to its pieces; them and the head he put upon the altar.
And he washed the belly and the feet with water, and he put them on the whole-burnt-offering on the altar.
And he brought the gift of the people, and took the goat of the sin-offering of the people, and slew it, and purified it as also the first.
And he brought the whole-burnt-offering, and offered it in due form.
And he brought the sacrifice and filled his hands with it, and laid it on the altar, besides the morning whole-burnt-offering.
And he slew the calf, and the ram of the sacrifice of peace-offering of the people; and the sons of Aaron brought the blood to him, and he poured it out on the altar round about.
And he took the fat of the calf, and the hind quarters of the ram, and the fat covering the belly, and the two kidneys, and the fat upon them, and the caul on the liver.
And he put the fat on the breasts, and offered the fat on the altar.
And Aaron separated the breast and the right shoulder as a choice-offering before the Lord, as the Lord commanded Moses.
And Aaron lifted up his hands on the people and blessed them; and after he had offered the sin-offering, and the whole-burnt-offerings, and the peace-offerings, he came down.
And Moses and Aaron entered into the tabernacle of witness. And they came out and blessed all the people, and the glory of the Lord appeared to all the people.
And fire came forth from the Lord, and devoured the offerings on the altar, both the whole-burnt-offerings and the fat; and all the people saw, and were amazed, and fell upon their faces.
And Abraam was old, advanced in days, and the Lord blessed Abraam in all things.
And it shall be, the virgin to whomsoever I shall say, Incline thy water-pot, that I may drink, and she shall say, Drink thou, and I will give thy camels drink, until they shall have done drinkingeven this one thou hast prepared for thy servant Isaac, and hereby shall I know that thou hast dealt mercifully with my master Abraam.
And it came to pass before he had done speaking in his mind, that behold, Rebecca the daughter of Bathuel, the son of Melcha, the wife of Nachor, and  the brother of Abraam, came forth, having a water-pot on her shoulders.
And she said, I will also draw water for thy camels, till they shall all have drunk.
And she hasted, and emptied the water-pot into the trough, and ran to the well to draw again, and drew water for all the camels.
And the man took great notice of her, and remained silent to know whether the Lord had made his way prosperous or not.
And it came to pass when all the camels ceased drinking, that the man took golden ear-rings, each of a drachm weight, and he two bracelets on her hands, their weight was ten pieces of gold.
But thou shalt go to the house of my father, and to my tribe, and thou shalt take thence a wife for my son.
And I said to my master, Haply the woman will not go with me.
And he said to me, The Lord God to whom I have been acceptable in his presence, himself shall send out his angel with thee, and shall prosper thy journey, and thou shalt take a wife for my son of my tribe, and of the house of my father.
behold, I stand by the well of water, and the daughters of the men of the city come forth to draw water, and it shall be the damsel to whom I shall say, Give me a little water to drink out of thy pitcher,
and she shall say to me, Both drink thou, and I will draw water for thy camels, this the wife whom the Lord has prepared for his own servant Isaac; and hereby shall I know that thou hast wrought mercy with my master Abraam.
And they blessed Rebecca, and said to her, Thou art our sister; become thou thousands of myriads, and let thy seed possess the cities of their enemies.
And Rebecca rose up and her maidens, and they mounted the camels and went with the man; and the servant having taken up Rebecca, departed.
And Isaac went through the wilderness to the well of the vision, and he dwelt in the land toward the south.
And the servant told Isaac all that he had done.
And Isaac went into the house of his mother, and took Rebecca, and she became his wife, and he loved her; and Isaac was comforted for Sarrha his mother.
And it shall be equal below, they shall be equal toward the same part from the heads to one joining; so shalt thou make to both the two corners, let them be equal.
And there shall be eight posts, and their sixteen silver sockets; two sockets to one post on both its sides, and two sockets to the other post.
And thou shalt make bars of incorruptible wood; five to one post on one side of the tabernacle,
and five bars to one post on the second side of the tabernacle, and five bars to the hinder posts, on the side of the tabernacle toward the sea.
And let the bar in the middle between the posts go through from the one side to the other side.
And thou shalt gild the posts with gold; and thou shalt make golden rings, into which thou shalt introduce the bars, and thou shalt gild the bars with gold.
And thou shalt set up the tabernacle according to the pattern shewed thee in the mount.
And thou shalt make a veil of blue and purple and scarlet woven, and fine linen spun: thou shalt make it cherubs in woven work.
And thou shalt set it upon four posts of incorruptible wood overlaid with gold; and their tops shall be gold, and their four sockets shall be of silver.
And thou shalt put the veil on the posts, and thou shalt carry in thither within the veil the ark of the testimony; and the veil shall make a separation for you between the holy and the holy of holies.
And thou shalt screen with the veil the ark of the testimony in the holy of holies.
And thou shalt set the table outside the veil, and the candlestick opposite the table on the south side of the tabernacle; and thou shalt put the table on the north side of the tabernacle.
And thou shalt make a screen for the door of the tabernacle of blue, and purple, and spun scarlet and fine linen spun, the work of the embroiderer.
Is not the life of man upon earth a state of trial? and his existence as that of a hireling by the day?
Or as a servant that fears his master, and one who has grasped a shadow? or as a hireling waiting for his pay?
So have I also endured months of vanity, and nights of pain have been appointed me.
Whenever I lie down, I say, When will it be day? and whenever I rise up, again I say when will it be evening? and I am full of pains from evening to morning.
And my body is covered with loathsome worms; and I waste away, scraping off clods of dust from my eruption.
And my life is lighter than a word, and has perished in vain hope.
Remember then that my life is breath, and mine eye shalt not yet again see good.
I am as a cloud that is cleared away from the sky: for if a man go down to the grave, he shall not come up again:
and he shall surely not return to his own house, neither shall his place know him any more.
Then neither will I refrain my mouth: I will speak being in distress; being in anguish I will disclose the bitterness of my soul.
Am I a sea, or a serpent, that thou hast set a watch over me?
I said that my bed should comfort me, and I would privately counsel with myself on my couch.
Thou scarest me with dreams, and dost terrify me with visions.
Thou wilt separate life from my spirit; and yet keep my bones from death.
For I shall not live for ever, that I should patiently endure: depart from me, for my life is vain.
For what is man, that thou hast magnified him? or that thou givest heed to him?
Wilt thou visit him till the morning, and judge him till the time of rest?
How long dost thou not let me alone, nor let me go, until I shall swallow down my spittle?
If I have sinned, what shall I be able to do, O thou that understandest the mind of men? why hast thou made me as thine accuser, and why am I a burden to thee?
Why hast thou not forgotten my iniquity, and purged my sin? but now I shall depart to the earth; and in the morning I am no more.
And the Philistines took the ark of God, and brought it from Abenezer to Azotus.
And the Philistines took the ark of the Lord, and brought it into the house of Dagon, and set it by Dagon.
And the people of Azotus rose early, and entered into the house of Dagon; and looked, and behold, Dagon had fallen on his face before the ark of the Lord: and they lifted up Dagon, and set him in his place. And the hand of the Lord was heavy upon the Azotians, and he plagued them, and he smote them in their secret parts, Azotus and her coasts.
And it came to pass when they rose early in the morning, behold, Dagon had fallen on his face before the ark of the covenant of the Lord; and the head of Dagon and both the palms of his hands were cut off each before the threshold, and both the wrists of his hands had fallen on the floor of the porch; only the stump of Dagon was left.
Therefore the priests of Dagon, and every one that enters into the house of Dagon, do not tread upon the threshold of the house of Dagon in Azotus until this day, for they step over.
And the hand of the Lord was heavy upon Azotus, and he brought evil upon them, and it burst out upon them into the ships, and mice sprang up in the midst of their country, and there was a great and indiscriminate mortality in the city.
And the men of Azotus saw that it was so, and they said, The ark of the God of Israel shall not abide with us, for his hand is heavy upon us and upon Dagon our god.
And they send and gather the lords of the Philistines to them, and say, What shall we do to the ark of the God of Israel? and the Gittites say, Let the ark of God come over to us; and the ark of the God of Israel came to Geth.
And it came to pass after it went about to Geth, that the hand of the Lord comes upon the city, a very great confusion; and he smote the men of the city small and great, and smote them in their secret parts: and the Gittites made to themselves images of emerods.
And they send away the ark of God to Ascalon; and it came to pass when the ark of God went into Ascalon, that the men of Ascalon cried out, saying, Why have ye brought back the ark of the God of Israel to us, to kill us and our people?
And they send and gather the lords of the Philistines, and they said, Send away the ark of the God of Israel, and let it lodge in its place; and let it not slay us and our people.
For there was a very great confusion in all the city, when the ark of the God of Israel entered there; and those, who lived and died not were smitten with emerods; and the cry of the city went up to heaven.
My soul, praise the Lord.
While I live will I praise the Lord: I will sing praises to my God as long as I exist.
Trust not in princes, nor in the children of men, in whom there is no safety.
His breath shall go forth, and he shall return to his earth; in that day all his thoughts shall perish.
Blessed is he whose helper is the God of Jacob, whose hope is in the Lord his God:
who made heaven, and earth, the sea, and all things in them: who keeps truth for ever:
who executes judgment for the wronged: who gives food to the hungry. The Lord looses the fettered ones:
the Lord gives wisdom to the blind: The Lord sets up the broken down: the Lord loves the righteous: the Lord preserves the strangers;
he will relieve the orphan and widow: but will utterly remove the way of sinners.
The Lord shall reign for ever, even thy God, O Sion, to all generations.
And Joshua was old and very advanced in years; and the Lord said to Joshua, Thou art advanced in years, and there is much land left to inherit.
And this is the land that is left: the borders of the Phylistines, the Gesirite, and the Chananite,
from the wilderness before Egypt, as far as the borders of Accaron on the left of the Chananites the land is reckoned to the five principalities of the Phylistines, to the inhabitant of Gaza, and of Azotus, and of Ascalon, and of Geth, and of Accaron, and to the Evite;
from Thaeman even to all the land of Chanaan before Gaza, and the Sidonians as far as Aphec, as far as the borders of the Amorites.
And all the land of Galiath of the Phylistines, and all Libanus eastward from Galgal, under the mountain Aermon as far as the entering in of Emath;
every one that inhabits the hill country from Libanus as far as Masereth Memphomaim. All the Sidonians, I will destroy them from before Israel; but do thou give them by inheritance to Israel, as I charged thee.
And now divide this land by lot to the nine tribes, and to the half tribe of Manasse.
From Jordan to the great sea westward thou shalt give it them: the great sea shall be the boundary. But to the two tribes and to the half tribe of Manasse, to Ruben and to Gad Moses gave an inheritance beyond Jordan: Moses the servant of the Lord gave it to them eastward,
from Aroer, which is on the bank of the brook of Arnon, and the city in the midst of the valley, and all Misor from Maedaban.
All the cities of Seon king of the Amorites, who reigned from Esebon to the coasts of the children of Ammon;
and the region of Galaad, and the borders of the Gesirites and the Machatites, the whole mount of Aermon, and all the land of Basan to Acha.
All the kingdom of Og in the region of Basan, who reigned in Astaroth and in Edrain: he was left of the giants; and Moses smote him, and destroyed him.
But the children of Israel destroyed not the Gesirite and the Machatite and the Chananite; and the king of the Gesiri and the Machatite dwelt among the children of Israel until this day.
Only no inheritance was given to the tribe of Levi: the Lord God of Israel, he is their inheritance, as the Lord said to them; and this is the division which Moses made to the children of Israel in Araboth Moab, on the other side of Jordan, by Jericho.
And Moses gave the land to the tribe of Ruben according to their families.
And their borders were from Aroer, which is opposite the brook of Arnon, and theirs is the city that is in the valley of Arnon; and all Misor,
to Esebon, and all the cities in Misor, and Daebon, and Baemon-Baal, and the house of Meelboth;
and Basan, and Bakedmoth, and Maephaad,
and Kariathaim, and Sebama, and Serada, and Sion in mount Enab;
and Baethphogor, and Asedoth Phasga, and Baetthasinoth,
and all the cities of Misor, and all the kingdom of Seon king of the Amorites, whom Moses smote, even him and the princes of Madian, and Evi, and Roboc, and Sur, and Ur, and Robe prince of the spoils of Sion, and the inhabitants of Sion.
And Balaam the son of Baeor the prophet they slew in the battle.
And the borders of Ruben wereeven Jordan was the boundary; this is the inheritance of the children of Ruben according to their families, these were their cities and their villages.
And Moses gave inheritance to the sons of Gad according to their families.
And their borders were Jazer, all the cities of Galaad, and half the land of the children of Ammon to Araba, which is before Arad.
And from Esebon to Araboth by Massepha, and Botanim, and Maan to the borders of Daebon,
and Enadom, and Othargai, and Baenthanabra, and Soccotha, and Saphan, and the rest of the kingdom of Sean king of Esebon: and Jordan shall be the boundary as far as part of the sea of Chenereth beyond Jordan eastward.
This is the inheritance of the children of Gad according to their families and according to their cities: according to their families they will turn their backs before their enemies, because their cities and their villages were according to their families.
And Moses gave to half the tribe of Manasse according to their families.
And their borders were from Maan, and all the kingdom of Basan, and all the kingdom of Og king of Basan, and all the villages of Jair, which are in the region of Basan, sixty cities:
and the half of Galaad, and in Astaroth, and in Edrain, royal cities of Og in the land of Basan, Moses gave to the sons of Machir the sons of Manasse, even to the half-tribe sons of Machir the sons of Manasse, according to their families.
These are they whom Moses caused to inherit beyond Jordan in Araboth Moab, beyond Jordan by Jericho eastward.
If ye do indeed speak righteousness, then do ye judge rightly, ye sons of men.
For ye work iniquities in your hearts in the earth: your hands plot unrighteousness.
Sinners have gone astray from the womb: they go astray from the belly: they speak lies.
Their venom is like that of a serpent; as that of a deaf asp, and that stops her ears;
which will not hear the voice of charmers, nor heed the charm prepared skillfully by the wise.
God has crushed their teeth in their mouth: God has broken the cheek-teeth of the lions.
They shall utterly pass away like water running through: he shall bend his bow till they shall fail.
They shall be destroyed as melted wax: the fire has fallen and they have not seen the sun.
Before your thorns feel the white thorn, he shall swallow you up as living, as in his wrath.
The righteous shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance of the ungodly: he shall wash his hands in the blood of the sinner.
And a man shall say, Verily then there is a reward for the righteous: verily there is a God that judges them in the earth.
Praise the Lord, ye servants of his, praise, the name of the Lord.
Let the name of the Lord be blessed, from this present time and for ever.
From the rising of the sun to his setting, the name of the Lord is to be praised.
The Lord is high above all the nations; his glory is above the heavens.
Who is as the Lord our God? who dwells in the high places,
and yet looks upon the low things in heaven, and on the earth:
who lifts up the poor from the earth, and raises up the needy from the dunghill;
to set him with princes, even with the princes of his people:
who settles the barren woman in a house, as a mother rejoicing over children.
In that day God shall bring his holy and great and strong sword upon the dragon, even the serpent that flees, upon the dragon, the crooked serpent: he shall destroy the dragon.
In that day there shall be a fair vineyard, and a desire to commence a song concerning it.
I am a strong city, a city in a siege: in vain shall I water it; for it shall be taken by night, and by day the wall shall fall.
There is no woman that has not taken hold of it; who will set me to watch stubble in the field? because of this enemy I have set her aside; therefore on this account the Lord has done all that he appointed.
I am burnt up; they that dwell in her shall cry, Let us make peace with him, let us make peace,
they that are coming are the children of Jacob. Israel shall bud and blossom, and the world shall be filled with his fruit.
Shall he himself be thus smitten, even as he smote? and as he slew, shall he be thus slain?
Fighting and reproaching he will dismiss them; didst thou not meditate with a harsh spirit, to slay them with a wrathful spirit?
Therefore shall the iniquity of Jacob be taken away; and this is his blessing, when I shall have taken away his sin; when they shall have broken to pieces all the stones of the altars as fine dust, and their trees shall not remain, and their idols shall be cut off, as a thicket afar off.
The flock that dwelt there shall be left, as a deserted flock; and the ground shall be for a long time for pasture, and there shall flocks lie down to rest.
And after a time there shall be in it no green thing because of the grass being parched. Come hither, ye women that come from a sight; for it is a people of no understanding; therefore he that made them shall have no pity upon them, and he that formed them shall have no mercy upon them.
And it shall come to pass in that day that God shall fence men off from the channel of the river as far as Rhinocorura; but do ye gather one by one the children of Israel.
And it shall come to pass in that day that they shall blow the great trumpet, and the lost ones in the land of the Assyrians shall come, and the lost ones in Egypt, and shall worship the Lord on the holy mountain in Jerusalem.
And it came to pass when the kings of the Amorites who were beyond Jordan heard, and the kings of Phoenicia by the sea, that the Lord God had dried up the river Jordan from before the children of Israel when they passed over, that their hearts failed, and they were terror-stricken, and there was no sense in them because of the children of Israel.
And about this time the Lord said to Joshua, Make thee stone knives of sharp stone, and sit down and circumcise the children of Israel the second time.
And Joshua made sharp knives of stone, and circumcised the children of Israel at the place called the Hill of Foreskins.
And this is the way in which Joshua purified the children of Israel; as many as were born in the way, and as many as were uncircumcised of them that came out of Egypt,
all these Joshua circumcised; for forty and two years Israel wondered in the wilderness of Mabdaris
Wherefore most of the fighting men that came out of the land of Egypt, were uncircumcised, who disobeyed the commands of God; concerning whom also he determined that they should not see the land, which the Lord sware to give to their fathers, even a land flowing with milk and honey.
And in their place he raised up their sons, whom Joshua circumcised, because they were uncircumcised, having been born by the way.
And when they had been circumcised they rested continuing there in the camp till they were healed.
And the Lord said to Joshua the son of Naue, On this day have I removed the reproach of Egypt from you: and he called the name of that place Galgala.
And the children of Israel kept the passover on the fourteenth day of the month at evening, to the westward of Jericho on the opposite side of the Jordan in the plain.
And they ate of the grain of the earth unleavened and new corn.
In this day the manna failed, after they had eaten of the corn of the land, and the children of Israel no longer had manna: and they took the fruits of the land of the Phoenicians in that year.
And it came to pass when Joshua was in Jericho, that he looked up with his eyes and saw a man standing before him, and there was a drawn sword in his hand; and Joshua drew near and said to him, Art thou for us or on the side of our enemies?
And he said to him, I am now come, the chief captain of the host of the Lord.
And Joshua fell on his face upon the earth, and said to him, Lord, what commandest thou thy servant?
Now the word of the Lord came to Jonas the son of Amathi, saying,
Rise, and go to Nineve, the great city, and preach in it; for the cry of its wickedness is come up to me.
But Jonas rose up to flee to Tharsis from the presence of the Lord. And he went down to Joppa, and found a ship going to Tharsis: and he paid his fare, and went up into it, to sail with them to Tharsis from the presence of the Lord.
And the Lord raised up a wind on the sea; and there was a great storm on the sea, and the ship was in danger of being broken.
And the sailors were alarmed, and cried every one to his god, and cast out the wares that were in the ship into the sea, that it might be lightened of them. But Jonas was gone down into the hold of the ship, and was asleep, and snored.
And the shipmaster came to him, and said to him, Why snorest thou? arise, and call upon thy God, that God may save us, and we perish not.
And each man said to his neighbour, Come, let us cast lots, and find out for whose sake this mischief is upon us. So they cast lots, and the lot fell upon Jonas.
And they said to him, Tell us what is thine occupation, and whence comest thou, and of what country and what people art thou?
And he said to them, I am a servant of the Lord; and I worship the Lord God of heaven, who made the sea, and the dry land.
Then the men feared exceedingly, and said to him, What is this that thou hast done? for the men knew that he was fleeing from the face of the Lord, because he had told them.
And they said to him, What shall we do to thee, that the sea may be calm to us? for the sea rose, and lifted its wave exceedingly.
And Jonas said to them, Take me up, and cast me into the sea, and the sea shall be calm to you: for I know that for my sake this great tempest is upon you.
And the men tried hard to return to the land, and were not able: for the sea rose and grew more and more tempestuous against them.
And they cried to the Lord, and said, Forbid it, Lord: let us not perish for the sake of this man's life, and bring not righteous blood upon us: for thou, Lord, hast done as thou wouldest.
So they took Jonas, and cast him out into the sea: and the sea ceased from its raging.
And the men feared the Lord very greatly, and offered a sacrifice to the Lord, and vowed vows.
As the hart earnestly desires the fountains of water, so my soul earnestly longs for thee, O God.
My soul has thirsted for the living God: when shall I come and appear before God?
My tears have been bread to me day and night, while they daily said to me, Where is thy God?
I remembered these things, and poured out my soul in me, for I will go to the place of thy wondrous tabernacle, even to the house of God, with a voice of exultation and thanksgiving and of the sound of those who keep festival.
Wherefore art thou very sad, O my soul? and wherefore dost thou trouble me? hope in God; for I will give thanks to him; he is the salvation of my countenance.
O my God, my soul has been troubled within me: therefore will I remember thee from the land of Jordan, and of the Ermonites, from the little hill.
Deep calls to deep at the voice of thy cataracts: all thy billows and thy waves have gone over me.
By day the Lord will command his mercy, and manifest it by night: with me is prayer to the God of my life.
I will say to God, Thou art my helper; why hast thou forgotten me? wherefore do I go sad of countenance, while the enemy oppresses me?
While my bones were breaking, they that afflicted me reproached me; while they said to me daily, Where is thy God?
Wherefore art thou very sad, O my soul? and wherefore dost thou trouble me? hope in God; for I will give thanks to him; he is the health of my countenance, and my God.
Woe to them that go down to Egypt for help, who trust in horses and chariots, for they are many; and in horses, which are a great multitude; and have not trusted in the Holy One of Israel, and have not sought the Lord.
Therefore he has wisely brought evils upon them, and his word shall not be frustrated; and he shall rise up against the houses of wicked men, and against their vain hope,
even an Egyptian, a man, and not God; the flesh of horses, and there is no help in them: but the Lord shall bring his hand upon them, and the helpers shall fail, and all shall perish together.
For thus said the Lord to me, As a lion would roar, or a lion's whelp over prey which he has taken, and cry over it, until the mountains are filled with his voice, and the animals are awe-struck and tremble at the fierceness of his wrath: so the Lord of hosts shall descend to fight upon the mount Sion, even upon her mountains.
As birds flying, so shall the Lord of hosts defend; he shall defend Jerusalem, and he shall rescue, and save and deliver.
Turn, ye children of Israel, who devise a deep and sinful counsel.
For in that day men shall renounce their silver idols and their golden idols, which their hands made.
And the Assyrian shall fall: not the sword of a great man, nor the sword of a mean man shall devour him; neither shall he flee from the face of the sword: but the young men shall be overthrown:
for they shall be compassed with rocks as with a trench, and shall be worsted; and he that flees shall be taken. Thus saith the Lord, Blesses is he that has a seed in Sion, and household friends in Jerusalem.
Give thanks to the Lord, and call upon his name; declare his works among the heathen.
Sing to him, yea, sing praises to him: tell forth all his wonderful works.
Glory in his holy name: let the heart of them that seek the Lord rejoice.
Seek ye the Lord, and be strengthened; seek his face continually.
Remember his wonderful works that he has done; his wonders, and the judgments of his mouth;
ye seed of Abraam, his servants, ye children of Jacob, his chosen ones.
He is the Lord our God; his judgments are in all the earth.
He has remembered his covenant for ever, the word which he commanded for a thousand generation:
which he established as a covenant to Abraam, and he remembered his oath to Isaac.
And he established it to Jacob for an ordinance, and to Israel for an everlasting covenant;
saying To thee will I give the land of Chanaan, the line of your inheritance:
when they were few in number, very few, and sojourners in it.
And they went from nation to nation, and from one kingdom to another people.
He suffered no man to wrong them; and he rebuked kings for their sakes:
saying, Touch not my anointed ones; and do my prophets no harm.
Moreover he called for a famine upon the land; he broke the whole support of bread.
He sent a man before them; Joseph was sold for a slave.
They hurt his feet with fetters; his soul passed into iron,
until the time that his cause came on; the word of the Lord tried him as fire.
The king sent and loosed him; even the prince of the people, and let him go free.
He made him Lord over his house, and ruler of all his substance;
to chastise his rulers at his pleasure, and to teach his elders wisdom.
Israel also came into Egypt, and Jacob sojourned in the land of Cham.
And he increased his people greatly, and made them stronger than their enemies.
And he turned their heart to hate his people, to deal craftily with his servants.
He sent fort Moses his servant, and Aaron whom he had chosen.
He established among them his signs, and his wonders in the land of Cham.
He sent forth darkness, and made it dark; yet they rebelled against his words.
He turned their waters into blood, and slew their fish.
Their land produced frogs abundantly, in the chambers of their kings.
He spoke, and the dog-fly came, and lice in all their coasts.
He turned their rain into hail, and sent flaming fire in their land.
And he smote their vines and their fig trees; and broke every tree of their coast.
He spoke, and the locust came, and caterpillars innumerable,
and devoured all the grass in their land, and devoured the fruit of the ground.
He smote also every first-born of their land, the first-fruits of all their labour.
And he brought them out with silver and gold; and there was not a feeble one among their tribes.
Egypt rejoiced at their departing; for the fear of them fell upon them.
He spread out a cloud for a covering to them, and fire to give them light by night.
They asked, and the quail came, and he satisfied them with the bread of heaven.
He clave the rock, and the waters flowed, rivers ran in dry places.
For he remembered his holy word, which he promised to Abraam his servant.
And he brought out his people with exultation, and his chosen with joy;
and gave them the lands of the heathen; and they inherited the labours of the people;
that they might keep his ordinances, and diligently seek his law.
Deliver me from the hand of my brother, from the hand of Esau, for I am afraid of him, lest haply he should come and smite me, and the mother upon the children.
But thou saidst, I will do thee good, and will make thy seed as the sand of the sea, which shall not be numbered for multitude.
And he slept there that night, and took of the gifts which he carried , and sent out to Esau his brother,
And he gave them to his servants drove apart; and he said to his servants, Go on before me, and put a space between drove and drove.
And he charged the first, saying, If Esau my brother meet thee, and he ask thee, saying, Whose art thou? and whither wouldest thou go, and whose are these possessions advancing before thee?
And Saul chooses for himself three thousand men of the men of Israel: and there were with Saul two thousand who were in Machmas, and in mount Baethel, and a thousand were with Jonathan in Gabaa of Benjamin: and he sent the rest of the people every man to his tent.
And Jonathan smote Nasib the Philistine that dwelt in the hill; and the Philistines hear of it, and Saul sounds the trumpet through all the land, saying, The servants have despised us.
And all Israel heard say, Saul has smitten Nasib the Philistine; now Israel had been put to shame before the Philistines; and the children of Israel went up after Saul in Galgala.
And the Philistines gather together to war with Israel; and then come up against Israel thirty thousand chariots, and six thousand horsemen, and people as the sand by the seashore for multitude: and they come up, and encamp in Machmas, opposite Baethoron southward.
And the men of Israel saw that they were in a strait so that they could not draw nigh, and the people hid themselves in caves, and sheepfolds, and rocks, and ditches, and pits.
And they that went over went over Jordan to the land of Gad and Galaad: and Saul was yet in Galgala, and all the people followed after him in amazement.
And he continued seven days for the appointed testimony, as Samuel told him, and Samuel came not to Galgala, and his people were dispersed from him.
And Saul said, Bring hither victims, that I may offer whole-burnt-offerings and peace-offerings: and he offered the whole-burnt-offering.
And it came to pass when he had finished offering the whole-burnt-offering, that Samuel arrived, and Saul went out to meet him, and to bless him.
And Samuel said, What hast thou done? and Saul said, Because I saw how the people were scattered from me, and thou was not present as thou purposedst according to the set time of the days, and the Philistines were gathered to Machmas.
Then I said, Now will the Philistines come down to me to Galgala, and I have not sought the face of the Lord: so I forced myself and offered the whole-burnt-offering.
And Samuel said to Saul, Thou hast done foolishly; for thou hast not kept my command, which the Lord commanded thee, as now the Lord would have confirmed thy kingdom over Israel for ever.
But now thy kingdom shall not stand to thee, and the Lord shall seek for himself a man after his own heart; and the Lord shall appoint him to be a ruler over his people, because thou hast not kept all that the Lord commanded thee.
And Samuel arose, and departed from Galgala, and the remnant of the people went after Saul to meet him after the men of war, when they had come out of Galgala to Gabaa of Benjamin. And Saul numbered the people that were found with him, about six hundred men.
And Saul and Jonathan his son, and the people that were found with them, halted in Gabaa, of Benjamin; and they wept: and the Philistines had encamped in Machmas.
And men came forth to destroy out of the land of the Philistines in three companies; one company turning by the way of Gophera toward the land of Sogal,
and another company turning the way of Baethoron, and another company turning by the way of Gabae that turns aside to Gai of Sabim.
And there was not found a smith in all the land of Israel, for the Philistines said, Lest the Hebrews make themselves sword or spear.
And all Israel went down to the Land of the Philistines to forge every one his reaping-hook and his tool, and every one his axe and his sickle.
And it was near the time of vintage: and their tools were valued at three shekels for a plough-share, and there was the same rate for the axe and the sickle.
And it came to pass in the days of the war of Machmas, that there was not a sword or spear found in the hand of all the people, that were with Saul and Jonathan; but with Saul and Jonathan his son was there found.
And there went out some from the camp of the Philistines to the place beyond Machmas.
Then Sophar the Minaean answered and said,
He that speaks much, should also hear on the other side: or does the fluent speaker think himself to be righteous? blessed is the short lived offspring of woman.
Be not a speaker of many words; for is there none to answer thee?
For say not, I am pure in my works, and blameless before him.
But oh that the Lord would speak to thee, and open his lips to thee!
Then shall he declare to thee the power of wisdom; for it shall be double of that which is with thee: and then shalt thou know, that a just recompence of thy sins has come to thee from the Lord.
Wilt thou find out the traces of the Lord? or hast thou come to the end of that which the Almighty has made?
Heaven is high; and what wilt thou do? and there are deeper things than those in hell; what dost thou know?
Or longer than the measure of the earth, or the breadth of the sea.
And if he should overthrow all things, who will say to him, What hast thou done?
For he knows the works of transgressors; and when he sees wickedness, he will not overlook it.
But man vainly buoys himself up with words; and a mortal born of woman is like an ass in the desert.
For if thou hast made thine heart pure, and liftest up thine hands towards him;
if there is any iniquity in thy hands, put if far from thee, and let not unrighteousness lodge in thy habitation.
For thus shall thy countenance shine again, as pure water; and thou shalt divest thyself of uncleanness, and shalt not fear.
And thou shalt forget trouble, as a wave that has passed by; and thou shalt not be scared.
And thy prayer shall be as the morning star, and life shall arise to thee as from the noonday.
And thou shalt be confident, because thou hast hope; and peace shall dawn to thee from out of anxiety and care.
For thou shalt be at ease, and there shall be no one to fight against thee; and many shall charge, and make supplication to thee.
But safety shall fail them; for their hope is destruction, and the eyes of the ungodly shall waste away.
Hearken, O Lord of my righteousness, attend to my petition; give ear to my prayer not uttered with deceitful lips.
Let my judgment come forth from thy presence; let mine eyes behold righteousness.
Thou has proved mine heart; thou hast visited me by night; thou hast tried me as with fire, and unrighteousness has not been found in me: I am purposed that my mouth shall not speak amiss.
As for the works of men, by the words of thy lips I have guarded myself from hard ways.
Direct my steps in thy paths, that my steps slip not.
I have cried, for thou heardest me, O God: incline thine ear to me, and hearken to my words.
Shew the marvels of thy mercies, thou that savest them that hope in thee.
Keep me as the apple of the eye from those that resist thy right hand: thou shalt screen me by the covering of thy wings,
from the face of the ungodly that have afflicted me: mine enemies have compassed about my soul.
They have enclosed themselves with their own fat: their mouth has spoken pride.
They have now cast me out and compassed me round about: they have set their eyes so as to bow them down to the ground.
They laid wait for me as a lion ready for prey, and like a lion's whelp dwelling in secret places.
Arise, O Lord, prevent them, and cast them down: deliver my soul from the ungodly: draw thy sword,
because of the enemies of thine hand: O Lord, destroy them from the earth; scatter them in their life, though their belly has been filled with thy hidden treasures: they have been satisfied with uncleanness, and have left the remnant of their possessions to their babes.
But I shall appear in righteousness before thy face: I shall be satisfied when thy glory appears.
Thus saith the Lord, Heaven is my throne, and the earth is my footstool: what kind of a house will ye build me? and of what kind is to be the place of my rest?
For all these things are mine, saith the Lord: and to whom will I have respect, but to the humble and meek, and the man that trembles at my words?
But the transgressor that sacrifices a calf to me, is as he that kills a dog; and he that offers fine flour, as one that offers swine's blood; he that gives frankincense for a memorial, is as a blasphemer. Yet they have chosen their own ways, and their soul has delighted in their abominations.
I also will choose their mockeries, and will recompense their sins upon them; because I called them, and they did not hearken to me; I spoke, and they heard not: and they did evil before me, and chose the things wherein I delighted not.
Hear the words of the Lord, ye that tremble at his word; speak ye, our brethren, to them that hate you and abominate you, that the name of the Lord may be glorified, and may appear their joy; but they shall be ashamed.
A voice of a cry from the city, a voice from the temple, a voice of the Lord rendering recompence to his adversaries.
Before she that travailed brought forth, before the travail-pain came on, she escaped it and brought forth a male.
Who has heard such a thing? and who has seen after this manner? Has the earth travailed in one day? or has even a nation been born at once, that Sion has travailed, and brought forth her children?
But I have raised this expectation, yet thou hast not remembered me, saith the Lord: behold, have not I made the bearing and barren woman? saith thy God.
Rejoice, O Jerusalem, and all ye that love her hold in her a general assembly: rejoice greatly with her, all that now mourn over her:
that ye may suck, and be satisfied with the breast of her consolation; that ye may milk out, and delight yourselves with the influx of her glory.
For thus saith the Lord, Behold, I turn toward them as a river of peace, and as a torrent bringing upon them in a flood the glory of the Gentiles: their children shall be borne upon the shoulders, and comforted on the knees.
As if his mother should comfort one, so will I also comfort you; and ye shall be comforted in Jerusalem.
And ye shall see, and your heart shall rejoice, and your bones shall thrive like grass: and the hand of the Lord shall be known to them that fear him, and he shall threaten the disobedient.
For, behold, the Lord will come as fire, and his chariots as a storm, to render his vengeance with wrath, and his rebuke with a flame of fire.
For with the fire of the Lord all the earth shall be judged, and all flesh with his sword: many shall be slain by the Lord.
They that sanctify themselves and purify themselves in the gardens, and eat swine's flesh in the porches, and the abominations, and the mouse, shall be consumed together, saith the Lord.
And I know their works and their imagination. I am going to gather all nations and tongues; and they shall come, and see my glory.
And I will leave a sign upon them, and I will send forth them that have escaped of them to the nations, to Tharsis, and Phud, and Lud, and Mosoch, and to Thobel, and to Greece, and to the isles afar off, to those who have not heard my name, nor seen my glory; and they shall declare my glory among the Gentiles.
And they shall bring your brethren out of all nations for a gift to the Lord with horses, and chariots, in litters drawn by mules with awnings, to the holy city Jerusalem, said the Lord, as though the children of Israel should bring their sacrifices to me with psalms into the house of the Lord.
And I will take of them priests and Levites, saith the Lord.
For as the new heaven and the new earth, which I make, remain before me, saith the Lord, so shall your seed and your name continue.
And it shall come to pass from month to month, and from sabbath to sabbath, that all flesh shall come to worship before me in Jerusalem, saith the Lord.
And they shall go forth, and see the carcasses of the men that have transgressed against me: for their worm shall not die, and their fire shall not be quenched; and they shall be a spectacle to all flesh.
He shall come into their midst as the land, as an eagle against the house of the Lord, because they have transgressed my covenant, and have sinned against my law.
They shall soon cry out to me, saying, O God, we know thee.
And the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying,
If any man should have in the skin of his flesh a bright clear spot, and there should be in the skin of his flesh a plague of leprosy, he shall be brought to Aaron the priest, or to one of his sons the priests.
And the priest shall view the spot in the skin of his flesh; and if the hair in the spot be changed to white, and the appearance of the spot be below the skin of the flesh, it is a plague of leprosy; and the priest shall look upon it, and pronounce him unclean.
But if the spot be clear and white in the skin of his flesh, yet the appearance of it be not deep below the skin, and its hair have not changed itself for white hair, but it is dark, then the priest shall separate him that has the spot seven days;
and the priest shall look on the spot the seventh day; and, behold, if the spot remains before him, if the spot has not spread in the skin, then the priest shall separate him the second time seven days.
And the priest shall look upon him the second time on the seventh day; and, behold, if the spot be dark, and the spot have not spread in the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him clean; for it is a mere mark, and the man shall wash his garments and be clean.
But if the bright spot should have changed and spread in the skin, after the priest has seen him for the purpose of purifying him, then shall he appear the second time to the priest,
and the priest shall look upon him; and, behold, if the mark have spread in the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it is a leprosy.
And if a man have a plague of leprosy, then he shall come to the priest;
and the priest shall look, and, behold, if it is a white spot in the skin, and it has changed the hair to white, and there be some of the sound part of the quick flesh in the sore
it is a leprosy waxing old in the skin of the flesh; and the priest shall pronounce him unclean, and shall separate him, because he is unclean.
And if the leprosy should have come out very evidently in the skin, and the leprosy should cover all the skin of the patient from the head to the feet, wheresoever the priest shall look;
then the priest shall look, and, behold, the leprosy has covered all the skin of the flesh; and the priest shall pronounce him clean of the plague, because it has changed all to white, it is clean.
But on whatsoever day the quick flesh shall appear on him, he shall be pronounced unclean.
And the priest shall look upon the sound flesh, and the sound flesh shall prove him to be unclean; for it is unclean, it is a leprosy.
But if the sound flesh be restored and changed to white, then shall he come to the priest;
and the priest shall see him, and, behold, if the plague is turned white, then the priest shall pronounce the patient clean: he is clean.
And if the flesh should have become an ulcer in his skin, and should be healed,
and there should be in the place of the ulcer a white sore, or one looking white and bright, or fiery, and it shall be seen by the priest;
then the priest shall look, and, behold, if the appearance be beneath the skin, and its hair has changed to white, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean; because it is a leprosy, it has broken out in the ulcer.
But if the priest look, and behold there is no white hair on it, and it be not below the skin of the flesh, and it be dark-coloured; then the priest shall separate him seven days.
But if it manifestly spread over the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it is a plague of leprosy; it has broken out in the ulcer.
But if the bright spot should remain in its place and not spread, it is the scar of the ulcer; and the priest shall pronounce him clean.
And if the flesh be in his skin in a state of fiery inflammation, and there should be in his skin the part which is healed of the inflammation, bright, clear, and white, suffused with red or very white;
then the priest shall look upon him, and, behold, if the hair being white is changed to a bright colour, and its appearance is lower than the skin, it is a leprosy; it has broken out in the inflammation, and the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it is a plague of leprosy.
But if the priest should look, and, behold, there is not in the bright spot any white hair, and it should not be lower than the skin, and it should be dark, then the priest shall separate him seven days.
And the priest shall look upon him on the seventh day; and if the spot be much spread in the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it is a plague of leprosy, it has broken out in the ulcer.
But if the bright spot remain stationary, and be not spread in the skin, but the sore should be dark, it is a scar of inflammation; and the priest shall pronounce him clean, for it is the mark of the inflammation.
And if a man or a woman have in them a plague of leprosy in the head or the beard;
then the priest shall look on the plague, and, behold, if the appearance of it be beneath the skin, and in it there be thin yellowish hair, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it is a scurf, it is a leprosy of the head or a leprosy of the beard.
And if the priest should see the plague of the scurf, and, behold, the appearance of it be not beneath the skin, and there is no yellowish hair in it, then the priest shall set apart him that has the plague of the scurf seven days.
And the priest shall look at the plague on the seventh day; and, behold, if the scurf be not spread, and there be no yellowish hair on it, and the appearance of the scurf is not hollow under the skin;
then the skin shall be shaven, but the scurf shall not be shaven; and the priest shall set aside the person having the scurf the second time for seven days.
And the priest shall see the scurf on the seventh day; and, behold, if the scurf is not spread in the skin after the man's being shaved, and the appearance of the scurf is not hollow beneath the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him clean; and he shall wash his garments, and be clean.
But if the scurf be indeed spread in the skin after he has been purified,
then the priest shall look, and, behold, if the scurf be spread in the skin, the priest shall not examine concerning the yellow hair, for he is unclean.
But if the scurf remain before him in its place, and a dark hair should have arisen in it, the scurf is healed: he is clean, and the priest shall pronounce him clean.
And if a man or woman should have in the skin of their flesh spots of a bright whiteness,
then the priest shall look; and, behold, there being bright spots of a bright whiteness in the skin of their flesh, it is a tetter; it burst forth in the skin of his flesh; he is clean.
Let not my soul come into their counsel, and let not mine inward parts contend in their conspiracy, for in their wrath they slew men, and in their passion they houghed a bull.
Cursed be their wrath, for it was willful, and their anger, for it was cruel: I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel.
Juda, thy brethren have praised thee, and thy hands shall be on the back of thine enemies; thy father's sons shall do thee reverence.
Juda is a lion's whelp: from the tender plant, my son, thou art gone up, having couched thou liest as a lion, and as a whelp; who shall stir him up?
Binding his foal to the vine, and the foal of his ass to the branch , he shall wash his robe in wine, and his garment in the blood of the grape.
His eyes shall be more cheering than wine, and his teeth whiter than milk.
Zabulon shall dwell on the coast, and he by a haven of ships, and shall extend to Sidon.
Issachar has desired that which is good; resting between the inheritances.
in the double cave which is opposite Mambre, in the land of Chanaan, the cave which Abraam bought of Ephron the Chettite, for a possession of a sepulchre.
There they buried Abraam and Sarrha his wife; there they buried Isaac, and Rebecca his wife; there they buried Lea;
O God, who shall be compared to thee? be not silent, neither be still, O God.
For behold, thine enemies have made a noise; and they that hate thee have lifted up the head.
Against thy people they have craftily imagined a device, and have taken counsel against thy saints.
They have said, Come, and let us utterly destroy them out of the nation; and let the name of Israel be remembered no more at all.
For they have taken counsel together with one consent: they have made a confederacy against thee;
even the tents of the Idumeans, and the Ismaelites; Moab, and the Agarenes;
Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalec; the Philistines also, with them that dwell at Tyre.
Yea, Assur too is come with them: they have become a help to the children of Lot. Pause.
Do thou to them as to Madiam, and to Sisera; as to Jabin at the brook of Kison.
They were utterly destroyed at Aendor: they became as dung for the earth.
Make their princes as Oreb and Zeb, and Zebee and Salmana; even all their princes:
who said, let us take to ourselves the altar of God as an inheritance.
O my God, make them as a wheel; as stubble before the face of the wind.
As fire which shall burn up a wood, as the flame may consume the mountains;
so shalt thou persecute them with thy tempest, and trouble them in thine anger.
Fill their faces with dishonour; so shall they seek thy name, O Lord.
Let them be ashamed and troubled for evermore; yea, let them be confounded and destroyed.
And let them know that thy name is Lord; that thou alone art Most High over all the earth.
A Song of Degrees. Many a time have they warred against me from my youth, let Israel now say:
Many a time have they warred against me from my youth: and yet they prevailed not against me.
The sinners wrought upon my back: they prolonged their iniquity.
The righteous Lord has cut asunder the necks of sinners.
Let all that hate Sion be put to shame and turned back.
Let them be as the grass of the house-tops, which withers before it is plucked up.
Wherewith the reaper fills not his hand, nor he that makes up the sheaves, his bosom.
Neither do they that go by say, The blessing of the Lord be upon you: we have blessed you in the name of the Lord.
And while he spoke with me, I fell upon my face to the earth: and he touched me, and set me on my feet.
And he said, Behold, I make thee know the things that shall come to pass at the end of the wrath: for the vision is yet for an appointed time.
The ram which thou sawest that had the horns is the king of the Medes and Persians.
The he-goat is the King of the Greeks: and the great horn which was between his eyes, he is the first king.
And as for the one that was broken, in whose place there stood up four horns, four kings shall arise out of his nation, but not in their own strength.
And at the latter time of their kingdom, when their sins are coming to the full, there shall arise a king bold in countenance, and understanding riddles.
And his power shall be great, and he shall destroy wonderfully, and prosper, and practise, and shall destroy mighty men, and the holy people.
And the yoke of his chain shall prosper: there is craft in his hand; and he shall magnify himself in his heart, and by craft shall destroy many, and he shall stand up for the destruction of many, and shall crush them as eggs in his hand.
And the vision of the evening and morning that was mentioned is true: and do thou seal the vision; for it is for many days.
And I Daniel fell asleep, and was sick: then I arose, and did the king's business; and I wondered at the vision, and there was none that understood it.
Wisdom lifteth up the head of him that is of low degree, and maketh him to sit among great men.
Commend not a man for his beauty; neither abhor a man for his outward appearance.
The bee is little among such as fly; but her fruit is the chief of sweet things.
Boast not of thy clothing and raiment, and exalt not thyself in the day of honour: for the works of the Lord are wonderful, and his works among men are hidden.
Many kings have sat down upon the ground; and one that was never thought of hath worn the crown.
Many mighty men have been greatly disgraced; and the honourable delivered into other men's hands.
Blame not before thou hast examined the truth: understand first, and then rebuke.
Answer not before thou hast heard the cause: neither interrupt men in the midst of their talk.
Strive not in a matter that concerneth thee not; and sit not in judgment with sinners.
My son, meddle not with many matters: for if thou meddle much, thou shalt not be innocent; and if thou follow after, thou shalt not obtain, neither shalt thou escape by fleeing.
There is one that laboureth, and taketh pains, and maketh haste, and is so much the more behind.
Again, there is another that is slow, and hath need of help, wanting ability, and full of poverty; yet the eye of the Lord looked upon him for good, and set him up from his low estate,
And lifted up his head from misery; so that many that saw from him is peace over all the
Prosperity and adversity, life and death, poverty and riches, come of the Lord.
The gift of the Lord remaineth with the ungodly, and his favour bringeth prosperity for ever.
There is that waxeth rich by his wariness and pinching, and this his the portion of his reward:
Whereas he saith, I have found rest, and now will eat continually of my goods; and yet he knoweth not what time shall come upon him, and that he must leave those things to others, and die.
Be stedfast in thy covenant, and be conversant therein, and wax old in thy work.
Marvel not at the works of sinners; but trust in the Lord, and abide in thy labour: for it is an easy thing in the sight of the Lord on the sudden to make a poor man rich.
The blessing of the Lord is in the reward of the godly, and suddenly he maketh his blessing flourish.
Say not, What profit is there of my service? and what good things shall I have hereafter?
Again, say not, I have enough, and possess many things, and what evil shall I have hereafter?
In the day of prosperity there is a forgetfulness of affliction: and in the day of affliction there is no more remembrance of prosperity.
For it is an easy thing unto the Lord in the day of death to reward a man according to his ways.
The affliction of an hour maketh a man forget pleasure: and in his end his deeds shall be discovered.
Judge none blessed before his death: for a man shall be known in his children.
Bring not every man into thine house: for the deceitful man hath many trains.
Like as a partridge taken and kept in a cage, so is the heart of the proud; and like as a spy, watcheth he for thy fall:
For he lieth in wait, and turneth good into evil, and in things worthy praise will lay blame upon thee.
Of a spark of fire a heap of coals is kindled: and a sinful man layeth wait for blood.
Take heed of a mischievous man, for he worketh wickedness; lest he bring upon thee a perpetual blot.
Receive a stranger into thine house, and he will disturb thee, and turn thee out of thine own.
and oppress not the stranger, and the orphan, and the widow, and shed not innocent blood in this place, and go not after strange gods to your hurt:
then will I cause you to dwell in this place, in the land which I gave to your fathers of old and for ever.
But whereas ye have trusted in lying words, whereby ye shall not be profited;
and ye murder, and commit adultery, and steal, and swear falsely, and burn incense to Baal, and are gone after strange gods whom ye know not,
so that it is evil with you; yet have ye come, and stood before me in the house, whereon my name is called, and ye have said, We have refrained from doing all these abominations.
Their children gather wood, and their fathers kindle a fire, and their women knead dough, to make cakes to the host of heaven; and they have poured out drink-offerings to strange gods, that they might provoke me to anger.
Thus saith the Lord, Gather your whole-burnt-offerings with your meat-offerings, and eat flesh.
Cut off thine hair, and cast it away, and take up a lamentation on thy lips; for the Lord has reprobated and rejected the generation that does these things.
And they have built the altar of Tapheth, which is in the valley of the son of Ennom, to burn their sons and their daughters with fire; which I did not command them to do, neither did I design it in my heart.
And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying,
Charge the children of Israel, and thou shalt speak to them, saying, Ye shall observe to offer to me in my feasts my gifts, my presents, my burnt-offerings for a sweet-smelling savour.
And thou shalt say to them, These are the burnt-offerings, all that ye shall bring to the Lord; two lambs of a year old without blemish daily, for a whole-burnt offering perpetually.
Thou shalt offer one lamb in the morning, and thou shalt offer the second lamb towards evening.
And thou shalt offer the tenth part of an ephah of fine flour for a meat-offering, mingled with oil, with the fourth part of a hin.
It is a perpetual whole-burnt-offering, a sacrifice offered in the mount of Sina for a sweet-smelling savour to the Lord.
And its drink-offering, the fourth part of a hin to each lamb; in the holy place shalt thou pour strong drink as a drink-offering to the Lord.
And the second lamb thou shalt offer toward evening; thou shalt offer it according to its meat-offering and according to its drink-offering for a smell of sweet savour to the Lord.
And on the sabbath-day ye shall offer two lambs of a year old without blemish, and two tenth deals of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat-offering, and a drink-offering.
It is a whole-burnt-offering of the sabbaths on the sabbath days, besides the continued whole-burnt-offering, and its drink offering.
And at the new moons ye shall bring a whole-burnt-offering to the Lord, two calves of the herd, and one ram, seven lambs of a year old without blemish.
Three tenth deals of fine flour mingled with oil for one calf, and two tenth deals of fine flour mingled with oil for one ram.
A tenth deal of fine flour mingled with oil for each lamb, as a meat-offering, a sweet-smelling savour, a burnt-offering to the Lord.
Their drink-offering shall be the half of a hin for one calf; and the third of a hin for one ram; and the fourth part of a hin of wine for one lamb: this is the whole-burnt-offering monthly throughout the months of the year.
And he shall offer one kid of the goats for a sin-offering to the Lord; it shall be offered beside the continual whole-burnt-offering and its drink-offering.
And in the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month, is the passover to the Lord.
And on the fifteenth day of this month is a feast; seven days ye shall eat unleavened bread.
And the first day shall be to you a holy convocation; ye shall do no servile work.
And ye shall bring whole-burnt-offerings, a sacrifice to the Lord, two calves of the herd, one ram, seven lambs of a year old; they shall be to you without blemish.
My son, if thou become surety for thy friend, thou shalt deliver thine hand to an enemy.
For a man's own lips become a strong snare to him, and he is caught with the lips of his own mouth.
My son, do what I command thee, and deliver thyself; for on thy friend's account thou art come into the power of evil men: faint not, but stir up even thy friend for whom thou art become surety.
Give not sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber with thine eyelids;
that thou mayest deliver thyself as a doe out of the toils, and as a bird out of a snare.
Go to the ant, O sluggard; and see, and emulate his ways, and become wiser than he.
For whereas he has no husbandry, nor any one to compel him, and is under no master,
he prepares food for himself in the summer, and lays by abundant store in harvest. Or go to the bee, and learn how diligent she is, and how earnestly she is engaged in her work; whose labours kings and private men use for health, and she is desired and respected by all: though weak in body, she is advanced by honouring wisdom.
How long wilt thou lie, O sluggard? and when wilt thou awake out of sleep?
Thou sleepest a little, and thou restest a little, and thou slumberest a short time, and thou foldest thine arms over thy breast a little.
Then poverty comes upon thee as an evil traveller, and want as a swift courier: but if thou be diligent, thine harvest shall arrive as a fountain, and poverty shall flee away as a bad courier.
A foolish man and a transgressor goes in ways that are not good.
And the same winks with the eye, and makes a sign with his foot, and teaches with the beckonings of his fingers.
His perverse heart devises evils: at all times such a one causes troubles to a city.
Therefore his destruction shall come suddenly; overthrow and irretrievable ruin.
For he rejoices in all things which God hates, and he is ruined by reason of impurity of soul.
The eye of the haughty, a tongue unjust, hands shedding the blood of the just;
and a heart devising evil thoughts, and feet hastening to do evil, are hateful to God.
An unjust witness kindles falsehoods, and brings on quarrels between brethren.
My son, keep the laws of thy father, and reject not the ordinances of thy mother:
but bind them upon thy soul continually, and hang them as a chain about thy neck.
Whensoever thou walkest, lead this along and let it be with thee; that it may talk with thee when thou wakest.
For the commandment of the law is a lamp and a light; a way of life; reproof also and correction:
to keep thee continually from a married woman, and from the calumny of a strange tongue.
Let not the desire of beauty overcome thee, neither be thou caught by thine eyes, neither be captivated with her eyelids.
For the value of a harlot is as much as of one loaf; and a woman hunts for the precious souls of men.
Shall any one bind fire in his bosom, and not burn his garments?
or will any one walk on coals of fire, and not burn his feet?
So is he that goes in to a married woman; he shall not be held guiltless, neither any one that touches her.
It is not to be wondered at if one should be taken stealing, for he steals that when hungry he may satisfy his soul:
but if he should be taken, he shall repay sevenfold, and shall deliver himself by giving all his goods.
But the adulterer through want of sense procures destruction to his soul.
He endures both pain and disgrace, and his reproach shall never be wiped off.
For the soul of her husband is full of jealousy: he will not spare in the day of vengeance.
He will not forego his enmity for any ransom: neither will he be reconciled for many gifts.
And it came to pass, when Jeremias ceased speaking to the people all the words of the Lord, for which the Lord had sent him to them, even all these words,
that Azarias son of Maasaeas spoke, and Joanan, the son of Caree, and all the men who had spoken to Jeremias, saying, It is false: the Lord has not sent thee to us, saying, Enter not into Egypt to dwell there:
but Baruch the son of Nerias sets thee against us, that thou mayest deliver us into the hands of the Chaldeans, to kill us, and that we should be carried away captives to Babylon.
So Joanan, and all the leaders of the host, and all the people, refused to hearken to the voice of the Lord, to dwell in the land of Juda.
And Joanan, and all the leaders of the host, took all the remnant of Juda, who had returned to dwell in the land;
the mighty men, and the women, and the children that were left, and the daughters of the king, and the souls which Nabuzardan had left with Godolias the son of Achicam and Jeremias the prophet, and Baruch the son of Nerias.
And they came into Egypt: for they hearkened not to the voice of the Lord: and they entered into Taphnas.
And the word of the Lord came to Jeremias in Taphnas, saying,
Take thee great stones, and hide them in the entrance, at the gate of the house of Pharao in Taphnas, in the sight of the men of Juda:
and thou shalt say, Thus has the Lord said; Behold, I will send, and will bring Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon, and he shall place his throne upon these stones which thou hast hidden, and he shall lift up weapons against them.
And he shall enter in, and smite the land of Egypt, delivering some for death to death; and some for captivity to captivity; and some for the sword to the sword.
And he shall kindle a fire in the houses of their gods, and shall burn them, and shall carry them away captives: and shall search the land of Egypt, as a shepherd searches his garment; and he shall go forth in peace.
And he shall break to pieces the pillars of Heliopolis that are in On, and shall burn their houses with fire.
Then the angel of the Lord answered and said, O Lord Almighty, how long wilt thou have no mercy on Jerusalem, and the cities of Juda, which thou has disregarded these seventy years?
And the Lord Almighty answered the angel that spoke with me good words and consolatory sayings.
And the angel that spoke with me said to me, Cry out and say, Thus saith the Lord Almighty; I have been jealous for Jerusalem and Sion with great jealousy.
And I am very angry with the heathen that combine to attack her: forasmuch as I indeed was a little angry, but they combined to attack her for evil.
Therefore thus saith the Lord: I will return to Jerusalem with compassion; and my house shall be rebuilt in her, saith the Lord Almighty, and a measuring line shall yet be stretched out over Jerusalem.
And the angel that spoke with me said to me, Cry yet, and say, Thus saith the Lord Almighty; Yet shall cities be spread abroad through prosperity; and the Lord shall yet have mercy upon Sion, and shall choose Jerusalem.
And I lifted up mine eyes and looked, and behold four horns.
And I said to the angel that spoke with me, What are these things, my lord? And he said to me, These are the horns that have scattered Juda, and Israel, and Jerusalem.
A wise son makes his father glad: but a foolish son is a grief to his mother.
Treasures shall not profit the lawless: but righteousness shall deliver from death.
The Lord will not famish a righteous soul: but he will overthrow the life of the ungodly.
Poverty brings a man low: but the hands of the vigorous make rich. A son who is instructed shall be wise, and shall use the fool for a servant.
A wise son is saved from heat: but a lawless son is blighted of the winds in harvest.
The blessing of the Lord is upon the head of the just: but untimely grief shall cover the mouth of the ungodly.
The memory of the just is praised; but the name of the ungodly man is extinguished.
A wise man in heart will receive commandments; but he that is unguarded in his lips shall be overthrown in his perverseness.
He that walks simply, walks confidently; but he that perverts his ways shall be known.
He that winks with his eyes deceitfully, procures griefs for men; but he that reproves boldly is a peacemaker.
There is a fountain of life in the hand of a righteous man; but destruction shall cover the mouth of the ungodly.
Hatred stirs up strife; but affection covers all that do not love strife.
He that brings forth wisdom from his lips smites the fool with a rod.
The wise will hide discretion; but the mouth of the hasty draws near to ruin.
The wealth of rich men is a strong city; but poverty is the ruin of the ungodly.
The works of the righteous produce life; but the fruits of the ungodly produce sins.
Instruction keeps the right ways of life; but instruction unchastened goes astray.
Righteous lips cover enmity; but they that utter railings are most foolish.
By a multitude of words thou shalt not escape sin; but if thou refrain thy lips thou wilt be prudent.
The tongue of the just is tried silver; but the heart of the ungodly shall fail.
The lips of the righteous know sublime truths: but the foolish die in want.
The blessing of the Lord is upon the head of the righteous; it enriches him, and grief of heart shall not be added to it.
A fool does mischief in sport; but wisdom brings forth prudence for a man.
The ungodly is engulphed in destruction; but the desire of the righteous is acceptable.
When the storm passes by, the ungodly vanishes away; but the righteous turns aside and escapes for ever.
As a sour grape is hurtful to the teeth, and smoke to the eyes, so iniquity hurts those that practise it.
The fear of the Lord adds length of days: but the years of the ungodly shall be shortened.
Joy rests long with the righteous: but the hope of the ungodly shall perish.
The fear of the Lord is a strong hold of the saints: but ruin comes to them that work wickedness.
The righteous shall never fail: but the ungodly shall not dwell in the earth.
The mouth of the righteous drops wisdom: but the tongue of the unjust shall perish.
The lips of just men drop grace: but the mouth of the ungodly is perverse.
And God remembered Noe, and all the wild beasts, and all the cattle, and all the birds, and all the reptiles that creep, as many as were with him in the ark, and God brought a wind upon the earth, and the water stayed.
And the fountains of the deep were closed up, and the flood-gates of heaven, and the rain from heaven was withheld.
And the water subsided, and went off the earth, and after an hundred and fifty days the water was diminished, and the ark rested in the seventh month, on the twenty-seventh day of the month, on the mountains of Ararat.
And the water continued to decrease until the tenth month.
And in the tenth month, on the first day of the month, the heads of the mountains were seen.
And it came to pass after forty days Noe opened the window of the ark which he had made.
And he sent forth a raven; and it went forth and returned not until the water was dried from off the earth.
And he sent a dove after it to see if the water had ceased from off the earth.
And the dove not having found rest for her feet, returned to him into the ark, because the water was on all the face of the earth, and he stretched out his hand and took her, and brought her to himself into the ark.
And having waited yet seven other days, he again sent forth the dove from the ark.
And the dove returned to him in the evening, and had a leaf of olive, a sprig in her mouth; and Noe knew that the water had ceased from off the earth.
And having waited yet seven other days, he again sent forth the dove, and she did not return to him again any more.
And it came to pass in the six hundred and first year of the life of Noe, in the first month, on the first day of the month, the water subsided from off the earth, and Noe opened the covering of the ark which he had made, and he saw that the water had subsided from the face of the earth.
And Noe built an altar to the Lord, and took of all clean beasts, and of all clean birds, and offered a whole burnt-offering upon the altar.
And the Lord God smelled a smell of sweetness, and the Lord God having considered, said, I will not any more curse the earth, because of the works of men, because the imagination of man is intently bent upon evil things from his youth, I will not therefore any more smite all living flesh as I have done.
All the days of the earth, seed and harvest, cold and heat, summer and spring, shall not cease by day or night.
And the Philistines gather all their armies to Aphec, and Israel encamped in Aendor, which is in Jezrael.
And the lords of the Philistines went on by hundreds and thousands, and David and his men went on in the rear with Anchus.
And the lords of the Philistines said, Who are these that pass by? And Anchus said to the captains of the Philistines, Is not this David the servant of Saul king of Israel? He has been with us some time, even this second year, and I have not found any fault in him from the day that he attached himself to me even until this day.
And the captains of the Philistines were displeased at him, and they say to him, Send the man away, and let him return to his place, where thou didst set him; and let him not come with us to the war, and let him not be a traitor in the camp: and wherewith will he be reconciled to his master? Will it not be with the heads of those men?
Is not this David whom they celebrated in dances, saying, Saul has smitten his thousands, and David his ten thousands?
And Anchus called David, and said to him, As the Lord lives, thou art right and approved in my eyes, and so is thy going out and thy coming in with me in the army, and I have not found any evil to charge against thee from the day that thou camest to me until this day: but thou art not approved in the eyes of the lords.
Now then return and go in peace, thus thou shalt not do evil in the sight of the lords of the Philistines.
And David said to Anchus, What have I done to thee? and what hast thou found in thy servant from the first day that I was before thee even until this day, that I should not come and war against the enemies of the lord my king?
And Anchus answered David, I know that thou art good in my eyes, but the lords of the Philistines say, He shall not come with us to the war.
Now then rise up early in the morning, thou and the servants of thy lord that are come with thee, and go to the place where I appointed you, and entertain no evil thought in thy heart, for thou art good in my sight: and rise early for your journey when it is light, and depart.
So David arose early, he and his men, to depart and guard the land of the Philistines: and the Philistines went up to Jezrael to battle.
And it came to pass in the ninth month of Sedekias king of Juda, that Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon came, and all his host, against Jerusalem, and they besieged it.
And in the eleventh year of Sedekiass, in the fourth month, on the ninth day of the month, the city was broken up.
And all the leaders of the king of Babylon went in, and sat in the middle gate, Marganasar, and Samagoth, and Nabusachar, and Nabusaris, Nagargas, Naserrabamath, and the rest of the leaders of the king of Babylon,
and they sent, and took Jeremias out of the court of the prison, and gave him in charge to Godolias the son of Achicam, the son of Saphan: and they brought him out, and he sat in the midst of the people.
And the word of the Lord came to Jeremias in the court of the prison, saying,
Go and say to Abdemelech the Ethiopian, Thus said the Lord God of Israel; Behold, I will bring my words upon this city for evil, and not for good.
But I will save thee in that day, and I will by no means deliver thee into the hands of the men before whom thou art afraid.
For I will surely save thee, and thou shalt by no means fall by the sword; and thou shalt find thy life, because thou didst trust in me, saith the Lord.
In those days there was no king in Israel; and in those days the tribe of Dan sought for itself an inheritance to inhabit, because no inheritance had fallen to it until that day in the midst of the tribes of the children of Israel.
And the sons of Dan sent from their families five men of valour, from Saraa and from Esthaol, to spy out the land and to search it; and they said to them, Go and search out the land. And they came as far as the mount of Ephraim to the house of Michaias and they lodged there,
in the house of Michaias, and they recognised the voice of the young man the Levite, and turned in thither; and said to him, Who brought thee in hither? and what doest thou in this place? and what hast thou here?
And he said to them, Thus and thus did Michaias to me, and he hired me, and I became his priest.
And they said to him, Enquire now of God, and we shall know whether our way will prosper, on which we are going.
And the priest said to them, Go in peace; your way in which ye go, is before the Lord.
And the five men went on, and came to Laisa; and they saw the people in the midst of it dwelling securely, at ease as is the manner of the Sidonians, and there is no one perverting or shaming a matter in the land, no heir extorting treasures; and they are far from the Sidonians, and they have no intercourse with any one.
They went some distance from the house of Michaias, and, behold, Michaias and the men in the houses near Michaias' house, cried out, and overtook the children of 27.
And the children of Dan turned their face, and said to Michaias, What is the matter with thee that thou hast cried out?
And Michaias said, Because ye have taken my graven image which I made, and my priest, and are gone; and what have I remaining? and what is this that ye say to me, Why criest thou?
And the children of Dan said to him, Let not thy voice be heard with us, lest angry men run upon thee, and take away thy life, and the lives of thy house.
And the children of Dan went their way; and Michaias saw that they were stronger than himself, and he returned to his house.
And the children of Dan took what Michaias had made, and the priest that he had, and they came to Laisa, to a people quiet and secure; and they smote them with the edge of the sword, and burnt the city with fire.
And there was no deliverer, because the city is far from the Sidonians, and they have no intercourse with men, and it is in the valley of the house of Raab; and they built the city, and dwelt in it.
And they called the name of the city Dan, after the name of Dan their father, who was born to Israel; and the name of the city was Ulamais before.
And the children of Dan set up the graven image for themselves; and Jonathan son of Gerson son of Manasse, he and his sons were priests to the tribe of Dan till the time of the carrying away of the nation.
And they set up for themselves the graven image which Michaias made, all the days that the house of God was in Selom; and it was so in those days that there was no king in Israel.
And if one be found slain with the sword in the land, which the Lord thy God gives thee to inherit, having fallen in the field, and they do not know who has smitten him;
thine elders and thy judges shall come forth, and shall measure the distances of the cities round about the slain man:
and it shall be that the city which is nearest to the slain man the elders of that city shall take a heifer of the herd, which has not laboured, and which has not borne a yoke.
And the elders of that city shall bring down the heifer into a rough valley, which has not been tilled and is not sown, and they shall slay the heifer in the valley.
And the priests the Levites shall come, because the Lord God has chosen them to stand by him, and to bless in his name, and by their word shall every controversy and every stroke be decided.
Come, let us exult in the Lord; let us make a joyful noise to God our Saviour.
Let us come before his presence with thanksgiving, and make a joyful noise to him with psalms.
For the Lord is a great God, and a great king over all gods: for the Lord will not cast off his people.
For the ends of the earth are in his hands; and the heights of the mountains are his.
For the sea is his, and he made it: and is hands formed the dry land.
Come, let us worship and fall down before him; and weep before the Lord that made us.
For he is our God; and we are the people of his pasture, and the sheep of his hand.
To-day, if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, as in the provocation, according to the day of irritation in the wilderness:
where your fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my works.
Forty years was I grieved with this generation, and said, They do always err in their heart, and they have not known my ways.
So I sware in my wrath, They shall not enter into my rest.
In the seventh month, on the twenty-first day of the month, the Lord spoke by Aggaeus the prophet, saying,
Speak now to Zorobabel the son of Salathiel, of the tribe of Juda, and to Jesus the son of Josedec, the high priest, and to all the remnant of the people, saying,
Who is there of you that saw this house in her former glory? and how do ye now look upon it, as it were nothing before your eyes?
Yet now be strong, O Zorobabel, saith the Lord; and strengthen thyself, O Jesus the high priest, the son of Josedec; and let all the people of the land strengthen themselves, saith the Lord, and work, for I am with you, saith the Lord Almighty;
and my Spirit remains in the midst of you; be of good courage.
For thus saith the Lord Almighty; Yet once I will shake the heaven, and the earth, and the sea, and the dry land;
and I will shake all nations, and the choice portions of all the nations shall come: and I will fill this house with glory, saith the Lord Almighty.
Mine is the silver, and mine the gold, saith the Lord Almighty.
For the glory of this house shall be great, the latter more than the former, saith the Lord Almighty: and in this place will I give peace, saith the Lord Almighty, even peace of soul for a possession to every one that builds, to raise up this temple.
On the four and twentieth day of the ninth month, in the second year of Darius, the word of the Lord came to Aggaeus the prophet, saying,
Thus saith the Lord Almighty; Inquire now of the priest concerning the law, saying,
If a man should take holy flesh in the skirt of his garment, and the skirt of his garment should touch bread, or pottage, or wine, or oil, or any meat, shall it be holy? And the priests answered and said, No.
And Aggaeus said, If a defiled person who is unclean by reason of a dead body, touch any of these, shall it be defiled? And the priests answered and said, It shall be defiled.
And Aggaeus answered and said, So is this people, and so is this nation before me, saith the Lord; and so are all the works of their hands: and whosoever shall approach them, shall be defiled because of their early burdens: they shall be pained because of their toils; and ye have hated him that reproved in the gates.
And now consider, I pray you, from this day and beforetime, before they laid a stone on a stone in the temple of the Lord, what manner of men ye were.
When ye cast into the corn-bin twenty measures of barley, and there were only ten measures of barley: and ye went to the vat to draw out fifty measures, and there were but twenty.
I smote you with barrenness, and with blasting, and all the works of your hands with hail; yet ye returned not to me, saith the Lord.
Set your hearts now to think from this day and upward, from the four and twentieth day of the ninth month, even from the day when the foundation of the temple of the Lord was laid;
consider in your hearts, whether this shall be known on the corn-floor, and whether yet the vine, and the fig-tree, and the pomegranate, and the olive-trees that bear no fruit are with you: from this day will I bless you.
And the word of the Lord came the second time to Aggaeus the prophet, on the four and twentieth day of the month, saying,
Speak to Zorobabel the son of Salathiel, of the tribe of Juda, saying, I shake the heaven, and the earth, and the sea, and the dry land;
and I will overthrow the thrones of kings, and I will destroy the power of the kings of the nations; and I will overthrow chariots and riders; and the horses and their riders shall come down, every one by the sword striving against his brother.
Why has my beloved wrought abomination in my house? will prayers and holy offerings take away thy wickedness from thee, or shalt thou escape by these things?
The Lord called thy name a fair olive tree, of a goodly shade in appearance, at the noise of its being lopped, fire was kindled against it; great is the affliction coming upon thee: her branches are become good for nothing.
O Lord, teach me, and I shall know: then I saw their practices.
But I as an innocent lamb led to the slaughter, knew not: against me they devised an evil device, saying, Come and let us put wood into his bread, and let us utterly destroy him from off the land of the living, and let his name not be remembered any more.
O Lord, that judgest righteously, trying the reins and hearts, let me see thy vengeance taken upon them, for to thee I have declared my cause.
Therefore thus saith the Lord concerning the men of Anathoth, that seek my life, that say, Thou shalt not prophesy at all in the name of the Lord, but if thou dost, thou shalt die by our hands:
behold, I will visit them: their young men shall die by the sword; and their sons and their daughters shall die of famine:
and there shall be no remnant left of them; for I will bring evil upon the dwellers in Anathoth, in the year of their visitation.
Do no evil, so shall no harm come unto thee.
Depart from the unjust, and iniquity shall turn away from thee.
My son, sow not upon the furrows of unrighteousness, and thou shalt not reap them sevenfold.
Seek not of the Lord preeminence, neither of the king the seat of honour.
justify not thyself before the Lord; and boast not of thy wisdom before the king.
Seek not to be judge, being not able to take away iniquity; lest at any time thou fear the person of the mighty, an stumblingblock in the way of thy uprightness.
Offend not against the multitude of a city, and then thou shalt not cast thyself down among the people.
Bind not one sin upon another; for in one thou shalt not be unpunished.
Say not, God will look upon the multitude of my oblations, and when I offer to the most high God, he will accept it.
Be not fainthearted when thou makest thy prayer, and neglect not to give alms.
Laugh no man to scorn in the bitterness of his soul: for there is one which humbleth and exalteth.
Devise not a lie against thy brother; neither do the like to thy friend.
Use not to make any manner of lie: for the custom thereof is not good.
Use not many words in a multitude of elders, and make not much babbling when thou prayest.
Hate not laborious work, neither husbandry, which the most High hath ordained.
Number not thyself among the multitude of sinners, but remember that wrath will not tarry long.
Humble thyself greatly: for the vengeance of the ungodly is fire and worms.
Change not a friend for any good by no means; neither a faithful brother for the gold of Ophir.
Forego not a wise and good woman: for her grace is above gold.
Whereas thy servant worketh truly, entreat him not evil. nor the hireling that bestoweth himself wholly for thee.
Let thy soul love a good servant, and defraud him not of liberty.
Hast thou cattle? have an eye to them: and if they be for thy profit, keep them with thee.
Hast thou children? instruct them, and bow down their neck from their youth.
Hast thou daughters? have a care of their body, and shew not thyself cheerful toward them.
Marry thy daughter, and so shalt thou have performed a weighty matter: but give her to a man of understanding.
Hast thou a wife after thy mind? forsake her not: but give not thyself over to a light woman.
Honour thy father with thy whole heart, and forget not the sorrows of thy mother.
Remember that thou wast begotten of them; and how canst thou recompense them the things that they have done for thee?
Fear the Lord with all thy soul, and reverence his priests.
Love him that made thee with all thy strength, and forsake not his ministers.
Fear the Lord, and honour the priest; and give him his portion, as it is commanded thee; the firstfruits, and the trespass offering, and the gift of the shoulders, and the sacrifice of sanctification, and the firstfruits of the holy things.
And stretch thine hand unto the poor, that thy blessing may be perfected.
A gift hath grace in the sight of every man living; and for the dead detain it not.
Fail not to be with them that weep, and mourn with them that mourn.
Be not slow to visit the sick: fir that shall make thee to be beloved.
Whatsoever thou takest in hand, remember the end, and thou shalt never do amiss.
And if thou shouldest go forth to war against thine enemies, and shouldest see horse, and rider, and a people more numerous than thyself; thou shalt not be afraid of them, for the Lord thy God is with thee, who brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.
And it shall come to pass whenever thou shalt draw nigh to battle, that the priest shall draw nigh and speak to the people, and shall say to them,
Hear, O Israel; ye are going this day to battle against your enemies: let not your heart faint, fear not, neither be confounded, neither turn aside from their face.
For it is the Lord your God who advances with you, to fight with you against your enemies, and to save you.
And the scribes shall speak to the people, saying, What man is he that has built a new house, and has not dedicated it? let him go and return to his house, lest he die in the war, and another man dedicate it.
And what man is he that has planted a vineyard, and not been made merry with it? let him go and return to his house, lest he die in the battle, and another man be made merry with it.
And what man is he that has betrothed a wife, and has not taken her? let him go and return to his house, lest he die in the battle, and another man take her.
Sing to the Lord a new song; sing to the Lord, all the earth.
Sing to the Lord, bless his name: proclaim his salvation from day to day.
Publish his glory among the Gentiles, his wonderful works among all people.
For the Lord is great, and greatly to be praised: he is terrible above all gods.
For all the gods of the heathen are devils: but the Lord made the heavens.
Thanksgiving and beauty are before him: holiness and majesty are in his sanctuary.
Bring to the Lord, ye families of the Gentiles, bring to the Lord glory and honour.
Bring to the Lord the glory becoming his name: take offerings, and go into his courts.
Worship the Lord in his holy court: let all the earth tremble before him.
Say among the heathen, The Lord reigns: for he has established the world so that it shall not be moved: he shall judge the people in righteousness.
Let the heavens rejoice, and the earth exult; let the sea be moved, and the fullness of it.
The plains shall rejoice, and all things in them: then shall all the trees of the wood exult before the presence of the Lord:
for he comes, for he comes to judge the earth; he shall judge the world in righteousness, and the people with his truth.
Hear ye the word of the Lord, which he has spoken to you, O house of Israel.
Thus saith the Lord, Learn ye not the ways of the heathen, and be not alarmed at the signs of the sky; for they are alarmed at them, falling on their faces.
For the customs of the nations are vain; it is a tree cut out of the forest, the work of the carpenter, or a molten image.
They are beautified with silver and gold, they fix them with hammers and nails;
they will set them up that they may not move; it is wrought silver, they will not walk, it is forged silver They must certainly be borne, for they cannot ride of themselves. Fear them not; for they cannot do any evil, and there is no good in them.
Thus shall ye say to them, Let the gods which have not made heaven and earth perish from off the earth, and from under this sky.
It is the Lord that made the earth by his strength, who set up the world by his wisdom, and by his understanding stretched out the sky,
and set abundance of waters in the sky, and brought up clouds from the ends of the earth; he made lightnings for the rain, and brought forth light out of his treasures.
Every man is deprived of knowledge, every goldsmith is confounded because of his graven images; for he has cast false gods, there is no breath in them.
They are vain works, wrought in mockery; in the time of their visitation they shall perish.
Such is not the portion of Jacob; for he that formed all things, he is his inheritance; the Lord is his name.
He has gathered thy substance from without the lodged in choice vessels.
For thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will overthrow the inhabitants of this land with affliction, that thy plague may be discovered.
Chasten us, O Lord, but with judgment; and not in wrath, lest thou make us few.
Pour out thy wrath upon the nations that have not known thee, and upon the families that have not called upon thy name: for they have devoured Jacob, and consumed him, and have made his pasture desolate.
Extol not thyself in the counsel of thine own heart; that thy soul be not torn in pieces as a bull straying alone.
Thou shalt eat up thy leaves, and lose thy fruit, and leave thyself as a dry tree.
A wicked soul shall destroy him that hath it, and shall make him to be laughed to scorn of his enemies.
Sweet language will multiply friends: and a fairspeaking tongue will increase kind greetings.
Be in peace with many: nevertheless have but one counsellor of a thousand.
If thou wouldest get a friend, prove him first and be not hasty to credit him.
For some man is a friend for his own occasion, and will not abide in the day of thy trouble.
And there is a friend, who being turned to enmity, and strife will discover thy reproach.
Again, some friend is a companion at the table, and will not continue in the day of thy affliction.
But in thy prosperity he will be as thyself, and will be bold over thy servants.
If thou be brought low, he will be against thee, and will hide himself from thy face.
Separate thyself from thine enemies, and take heed of thy friends.
A faithful friend is a strong defence: and he that hath found such an one hath found a treasure.
Nothing doth countervail a faithful friend, and his excellency is invaluable.
A faithful friend is the medicine of life; and they that fear the Lord shall find him.
Whoso feareth the Lord shall direct his friendship aright: for as he is, so shall his neighbour be also.
My son, gather instruction from thy youth up: so shalt thou find wisdom till thine old age.
Come unto her as one that ploweth and soweth, and wait for her good fruits: for thou shalt not toil much in labouring about her, but thou shalt eat of her fruits right soon.
She is very unpleasant to the unlearned: he that is without understanding will not remain with her.
She will lie upon him as a mighty stone of trial; and he will cast her from him ere it be long.
For wisdom is according to her name, and she is not manifest unto many.
Give ear, my son, receive my advice, and refuse not my counsel,
And put thy feet into her fetters, and thy neck into her chain.
Bow down thy shoulder, and bear her, and be not grieved with her bonds.
Come unto her with thy whole heart, and keep her ways with all thy power.
Search, and seek, and she shall be made known unto thee: and when thou hast got hold of her, let her not go.
For at the last thou shalt find her rest, and that shall be turned to thy joy.
Then shall her fetters be a strong defence for thee, and her chains a robe of glory.
For there is a golden ornament upon her, and her bands are purple lace.
Thou shalt put her on as a robe of honour, and shalt put her about thee as a crown of joy.
My son, if thou wilt, thou shalt be taught: and if thou wilt apply thy mind, thou shalt be prudent.
If thou love to hear, thou shalt receive understanding: and if thou bow thine ear, thou shalt be wise,
Stand in the multitude of the elders; and cleave unto him that is wise.
Be willing to hear every godly discourse; and let not the parables of understanding escape thee.
And if thou seest a man of understanding, get thee betimes unto him, and let thy foot wear the steps of his door.
Let thy mind be upon the ordinances of the Lord and meditate continually in his commandments: he shall establish thine heart, and give thee wisdom at thine owns desire.
And there was a Levite sojourning in the sides of mount Ephraim, and he took to himself a concubine from Bethleem Juda.
And his concubine departed from him, and went away from him to the house of her father to Bethleem Juda, and she was there four months.
And her husband rose up, and went after her to speak kindly to her, to recover her to himself; and he had his young man with him, and a pair of asses; and she brought him into the house of her father; and the father of the damsel saw him, and was well pleased to meet him.
And his father-in-law, the father of the damsel, constrained him, and he stayed with him for three days; and they ate and drank, and lodged there.
And it came to pass on the fourth day that they rose early, and he stood up to depart; and the father of the damsel said to his son-in-law, Strengthen thy heart with a morsel of bread, and afterwards ye shall go.
So they two sat down together and ate and drank: and the father of the damsel said to her husband, Tarry now the night, and let thy heart be merry.
And the man rose up to depart; but his father-in-law constrained him, and he stayed and lodged there.
And behold, an old man came out of the field from his work in the evening; and the man was of mount Ephraim, and he sojourned in Gabaa, and the men of the place were sons of Benjamin.
And he lifted up his eyes, and saw a traveller in the street of the city; and the old man said to him, Whither goest thou, and whence comest thou?
And he said to him, We are passing by from Bethleem Juda to the sides of mount Ephraim: I am from thence, and I went as far as Bethleem Juda, and I am going home, and there is no man to take me into his house.
Yet is there straw and food for our asses, and bread and wine for me and my handmaid and the young man with thy servants; there is no want of anything.
And the old man said, Peace be to thee; only be every want of thine upon me, only do thou by no means lodge in the street.
And he brought him into his house, and made room for his asses; and they washed their feet, and ate and drank.
And they were comforting their heart, when, behold, the men of the city, sons of transgressors, compassed the house, knocking at the door: and they spoke to the old man the owner of the house, saying, Bring out the man who came into thy house, that we may know him.
And the master of the house came out to them, and said, Nay, brethren, do not ye wrong, I pray you, after this man has come into my house; do not ye this folly.
Behold my daughter a virgin, and the man's concubine: I will bring them out, and humble ye them, and do to them that which is good in your eyes; but to this man do not this folly.
But the men would not consent to hearken to him; so the man laid hold of his concubine, and brought her out to them; and they knew her, and abused her all night till the morning, and let her go when the morning dawned.
And the woman came toward morning, and fell down at the door of the house where her husband was, until it was light.
And her husband rose up in the morning, and opened the doors of the house, and went forth to go on his journey; and, behold, the woman his concubine had fallen down by the doors of the house, and her hands were on the threshold.
And he said to her, Rise, and let us go; and she answered not, for she was dead: and he took her upon his ass, and went to his place.
And he took his sword, and laid hold of his concubine, and divided her into twelve parts, and sent them to every coast of Israel.
And it was so, that every one who saw it said, Such a day as this has not happened nor has been seen from the day of the going up of the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt until this day: take ye counsel concerning it, and speak.
And it came to pass in those days that the Philistines gathered themselves together with their armies to go out to fight with Israel; and Anchus said to David, Know surely, that thou shalt go forth to battle with me, thou, and thy men.
And David said to Anchus, Thus now thou shalt know what thy servant will do. And Anchus said to David, So will I make thee captain of my body-guard continually.
And Samuel died, and all Israel lamented for him, and they bury him in his city, in Armathaim. And Saul had removed those who had in them divining spirits, and the wizards, out of the land.
And the Philistines assemble themselves, and come and encamp in Sonam: and Saul gathers all the men of Israel, and they encamp in Gelbue.
And Saul saw the camp of the Philistines, and he was alarmed, and his heart was greatly dismayed.
And Saul enquired of the Lord; and the Lord answered him not by dreams, nor by manifestations, nor by prophets.
Then Saul said to his servants, Seek for me a woman who has in her a divining spirit, and I will go to her, and enquire of her: and his servants said to him, Behold, there is a woman who has in her a divining spirit at Aendor.
And Saul disguised himself, and put on other raiment, and he goes, and two men with him, and they come to the woman by night; and he said to her, Divine to me, I pray thee, by the divining spirit within thee, and bring up to me him whom I shall name to thee.
And the woman said to him, Behold now, thou knowest what Saul has done, how he has cut off those who had in them divining spirits, and the wizards from the land, and why dost thou spread a snare for my life to destroy it?
And Saul swore to her, and said, As the Lord lives, no injury shall come upon thee on this account.
And the woman said, Whom shall I bring up to thee? and he said, Bring up to me Samuel.
And the woman saw Samuel, and cried out with a loud voice: and the woman said to Saul, Why hast thou deceived me? for thou art Saul.
And the king said to her, Fear not; tell me whom thou has seen. And the woman said to him, I saw gods ascending out of the earth.
And he said to her, What didst thou perceive? and she said to him, An upright man ascending out of the earth, and he was clothed with a mantle. And Saul knew that this was Samuel, and he stooped with his face to the earth, and did obeisance to him.
And Samuel said, Why hast thou troubled me, that I should come up? And Saul said, I am greatly distressed, and the Philistines war against me, and God has departed from me, and no longer hearkens to me either by the hand of the prophets or by dreams: and now I have called thee to tell me what I shall do.
And Samuel said, Why askest thou me, whereas the Lord has departed from thee, and taken part with thy neighbour?
And the Lord has done to thee, as the Lord spoke by me; and the Lord will rend thy kingdom out of thy hand, and will give it to thy neighbour David.
because thou didst not hearken to the voice of the Lord, and didst not execute his fierce anger upon Amalec, therefore the Lord has done this thing to thee this day.
And the Lord shall deliver Israel with thee into the hands of the Philistines, and to-morrow thou and thy sons with thee shall fall, and the Lord shall deliver the army of Israel into the hands of the Philistines.
And Saul instantly fell at his full length upon the earth, and was greatly afraid because of the words of Samuel; and there was no longer any strength in him, for he had eaten no bread all that day, and all that night.
And the woman went in to Saul, and saw that he was greatly disquieted, and said to him, Behold now, thine handmaid has hearkened to thy voice, and I have put my life in my hand, and have heard the words which thou has spoken to me.
And now hearken, I pray thee, to the voice of thine handmaid, and I will set before thee a morsel of bread, and eat, and thou shalt be strengthened, for thou wilt be going on thy way.
But he would not eat; so his servants and the woman constrained him, and he hearkened to their voice, and rose up from the earth, and sat upon a bench.
And the woman had a fat heifer in the house; and she hasted and slew it; and she took meal and kneaded it, and baked unleavened cakes.
And she brought the meat before Saul, and before his servants; and they ate, and rose up, and departed that night.
The word that came from the Lord to Jeremias, after that Nabuzardan the captain of the guard had let him go out of Rama, when he had taken him in manacles in the midst of the captivity of Juda, even those who were carried to Babylon.
And the chief captain of the guard took him, and said to him, The Lord thy God has pronounced all these evils upon this place:
and the Lord has done it; because ye sinned against him, and hearkened not to his voice.
Behold, I have loosed thee from the manacles that were upon thine hands. If it seem good to thee to go with me to Babylon, then will I set mine eyes upon thee.
But if not, depart; return to Godolias the son of Achicam, the son of Saphan, whom the king of Babylon has appointed governor in the land of Juda, and dwell with him in the midst of the people in the land of Juda: to whatsoever places it seems good in thine eyes to go, do thou even go. And the captain of the guard made him presents, and let him go.
And he came to Godolias to Massepha, and dwelt in the midst of his people that was left in the land.
And all the leaders of the host that was in the country, they and their men, heard that the king of Babylon had appointed Godolias governor in the land, and they committed to him the men and their wives, whom Nabuchodonosor had not removed to Babylon.
And there came to Godolias to Massepha Ismael the son of Nathanias, and Joanan son of Caree, and Saraeas the son of Thanaemeth, and the sons of Jophe the Netophathite, and Ezonias son of the Mochathite, they and their men.
And Godolias swore to them and to their men, saying, Be not afraid before the children of the Chaldeans: dwell in the land, and serve the king of Babylon, and it shall be better for you.
And, behold, I dwell in your presence at Massepha, to stand before the Chaldeans who shall come against you: and do ye gather grapes, and fruits, and oil, and put them into your vessels, and dwell in the cities which ye have obtained possession of.
And all the Jews that were in Moab, and among the children of Ammon, and those that were in Idumea, and those that were in all the rest of the country, heard that the king of Babylon had granted a remnant to Juda, and that he had appointed over them Godolias the son of Achicam.
And they came to Godolias into the land of Juda, to Massepha, and gathered grapes, and very much summer fruit, and oil.
And Joanan the son of Caree, and all the leaders of the host, who were in the fields, came to Godolias to Massepha,
and said to him, Dost thou indeed know that king Beleissa son of Ammon has sent Ismael to thee to slay thee? But Godolias believed them not.
And Joanan said to Godolias secretly in Massepha, I will go now and smite Ismael, and let no man know it; lest he slay thee, and all the Jews that are gathered to thee be dispersed, and the remnant of Juda perish.
But Godolias said to Joanan, Do not the thing, for thou speakest lies concerning Ismael.
False balances are an abomination before the Lord: but a just weight is acceptable unto him.
Wherever pride enters, there will be also disgrace: but the mouth of the lowly meditates wisdom.
When a just man dies he leaves regret: but the destruction of the ungodly is speedy, and causes joy.
Possessions will not profit in a day of wrath, but righteousness will deliver from death.
Righteousness traces out blameless paths: but ungodliness encounters unjust dealing.
The righteousness of upright men delivers them: but transgressors are caught in their own destruction.
At the death of a just man his hope does not perish: but the boast of the ungodly perishes.
A righteous man escapes from a snare, and the ungodly man is delivered up in his place.
In the mouth of ungodly men is a snare to citizens: but the understanding of righteous men is prosperous.
In the prosperity of righteous men a city prospers: but by the mouth of ungodly men it is overthrown.
At the blessing of the upright a city shall be exalted.
A man void of understanding sneers at his fellow citizens: but a sensible man is quiet.
A double-tongued man discloses the secret counsels of an assembly: but he that is faithful in spirit conceals matters.
They that have no guidance fall like leaves: but in much counsel there is safety.
A bad man does harm wherever he meets a just man: and he hates the sound of safety.
A gracious wife brings glory to her husband: but a woman hating righteousness is a theme of dishonour. The slothful come to want: but the diligent support themselves with wealth.
A merciful man does good to his own soul: but the merciless destroys his own body.
An ungodly man performs unrighteous works: but the seed of the righteous is a reward of truth.
A righteous son is born for life: but the persecution of the ungodly ends in death.
Perverse ways are an abomination to the Lord: but all they that are blameless in their ways are acceptable to him.
He that unjustly strikes hands shall not be unpunished: but he that sows righteousness he shall receive a faithful reward.
As an ornament in a swine's snout, so is beauty to an ill-minded women.
All the desire of the righteous is good: but the hope of the ungodly shall perish.
There are some who scatter their own, and make it more: and there are some also who gather, yet have less.
Every sincere soul is blessed: but a passionate man is not graceful.
May he that hoards corn leave it to the nation: but blessing be on the head of him that gives it.
He that devises good counsels seeks good favour: but as for him that seeks after evil, evil shall overtake him.
He that trusts in wealth shall fall; but he that helps righteous men shall rise.
He that deals not graciously with his own house shall inherit the wind; and the fool shall be servant to the wise man.
Out of the fruit of righteousness grows a tree of life; but the souls of transgressors are cut off before their time.
If the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear?
And God blessed Noe and his sons, and said to them, Increase and multiply, and fill the earth and have dominion over it.
And the dread and the fear of you shall be upon all the wild beasts of the earth, on all the birds of the sky, and on all things moving upon the earth, and upon all the fishes of the sea, I have placed them under your power.
For your blood of your lives will I require at the hand of all wild beasts, and I will require the life of man at the hand of brother man.
And behold I establish my covenant with you, and with your seed after you,
and with every living creature with you, of birds and of beasts, and with all the wild beasts of the earth, as many as are with you, of all that come out of the ark.
THE WORD THAT CAME TO JEREMIAS for all the Jews dwelling in the land of Egypt, and for those settled in Magdolo and in Taphnas, and in the land of Pathura, saying,
Thus has the Lord God of Israel said; Ye have seen all the evils which I have brought upon Jerusalem, and upon the cities of Juda; and, behold, they are desolate without inhabitants,
because of their wickedness, which they have wrought to provoke me, by going to burn incense to other gods, whom ye knew not.
yet I sent to you my servants the prophets early in the morning, and I sent, saying, Do not ye this abominable thing which I hate.
But they hearkened not to me, and inclined not their ear to turn from their wickedness, so as not to burn incense to strange gods.
So mine anger and my wrath dropped upon them, and was kindled in the gates of Juda, and in the streets of Jerusalem; and they became a desolation and a waste, as at this day.
And now thus has the Lord Almighty said, Wherefore do ye commit these great evils against your souls? to cut off man and woman of you, infant and suckling from the midst of Juda, to the end that not one of you should be left;
by provoking me with the works of your hands, to burn incense to other gods in the land of Egypt, into which ye entered to dwell there, that ye might be cut off, and that ye might become a curse and a reproach among all the nations of the earth?
Have ye forgotten the sins of your fathers, and the sins of the kings of Juda, and the sins of your princes, and the sins of your wives, which they wrought in the land of Juda, and in the streets of Jerusalem?
And have not ceased even to this day, and they have not kept to my ordinances, which I set before their fathers.
Therefore thus saith the Lord; Behold I do set my face against you
to destroy all the remnant that are in Egypt; and they shall fall by the sword, and by famine, and shall be consumed small and great: and they shall be for reproach, and for destruction, and for a curse.
And I will visit them that dwell in the land of Egypt, as I have visited Jerusalem, with sword and with famine:
and there shall not one be preserved of the remnant of Juda that sojourn in the land of Egypt, to return to the land of Juda, to which they hope in their hearts to return: they shall not return, but only they that escape.
Then all the men that knew that their wives burned incense, and all the women, a great multitude, and all the people that dwelt in the land of Egypt, in Pathura, answered Jeremias, saying,
As for the word which thou hast spoken to us in the name of the Lord, we will not hearken to thee.
For we will surely perform every word that shall proceed out of our mouth, to burn incense to the queen of heaven, and to pour drink-offerings to her, as we and our fathers have done, and our kings and princes, in the cities of Juda, and in the streets of Jerusalem: and so we were filled with bread, and were well, and saw no evils.
But since we left off to burn incense to the queen of heaven, we have all been brought low, and have been consumed by sword and by famine.
And whereas we burned incense to the queen of heaven, and poured drink-offerings to her, did we make cakes to her, and pour drink-offerings to her, without our husbands?
Then Jeremias answered all the people, the mighty men, and the women, and all the people that returned him these words for answer, saying,
Did not the Lord remember the incense which ye burned in the cities of Juda, and in the streets of Jerusalem, ye, and your fathers, and your kings, and your princes, and the people of the land? and came it not into his heart?
And the Lord could no longer bear you, because of the wickedness of your doings, and because of your abominations which ye wrought; and so your land became a desolation and a waste, and a curse, as at this day;
because of your burning incense, and because of the things wherein ye sinned against the Lord: and ye have not hearkened to the voice of the Lord, and have not walked in his ordinances, and in his law, and in his testimonies; and so these evils have come upon you.
And Jeremias said to the people, and to the women, Hear ye the word of the Lord.
Thus has the Lord God of Israel said; Ye women have spoken with your mouth, and ye fulfilled it with your hands, saying, We will surely perform our vows that we have vowed, to burn incense to the queen of heaven, and to pour drink-offerings to her: full well did ye keep to your vows, and ye have indeed performed them.
Therefore hear ye the word of the Lord, all Jews dwelling in the land of Egypt; Behold, I have sworn by my great name, saith the Lord, my name shall no longer be in the mouth of every Jew to say, The Lord lives, in all the land of Egypt.
For I have watched over them, to hurt them, and not to do them good: and all the Jews dwelling in the land of Egypt shall perish by sword and by famine, until they are utterly consumed.
And they that escape the sword shall return to the land of Juda few in number, and the remnant of Juda, who have continued in the land of Egypt to dwell there, shall know whose word shall stand.
And this shall be a sign to you, that I will visit you for evil.
Thus said the Lord; Behold, I will give Uaphres king of Egypt into the hands of his enemy, and into the hands of one that seeks his life; as I gave Sedekias king of Juda into the hands of Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon, his enemy, and who sought his life.
THE WORD WHICH JEREMIAS THE PROPHET spoke to Baruch son of Nerias, when he wrote these words in the book from the mouth of Jeremias, in the fourth year of Joakim the son of Josias king of Juda.
Thus has the Lord said to thee, O Baruch.
Whereas thou hast said, Alas! alas! for the Lord has laid a grievous trouble upon me; I lay down in groaning, I found no rest;
say thou to him, Thus saith the Lord; Behold, I pull down those whom I have built up, and I pluck up those whom I have planted.
And wilt thou seek great things for thyself? seek them not: for, behold, I bring evil upon all flesh, saith the Lord: but I will give to thee thy life for a spoil in every place whither thou shalt go.
My son, keep my words, and hide with thee my commandments. My son, honour the Lord, and thou shalt be strong; and fear none but him:
keep my commandments, and thou shalt live; and keep my words as the pupils of thine eyes.
And bind them on thy fingers, and write them on the table of thine heart.
Say that wisdom is thy sister, and gain prudence as an acquaintance for thyself;
that she may keep thee from the strange and wicked woman, if she should assail thee with flattering words.
For she looks from a window out of her house into the streets, at one whom she may see of the senseless ones, a young man void of understanding,
passing by the corner in the passages near her house,
and speaking, in the dark of the evening,
when there happens to be the stillness of night and of darkness:
and the woman meets him having the appearance of a harlot, that causes the hearts of young men to flutter.
And she is fickle, and debauched, and her feet abide not at home.
For at one time she wanders without, and at another time she lies in wait in the streets, at every corner.
Then she caught him, and kissed him, and with an impudent face said to him,
I have a peace-offering; today I pay my vows:
therefore I came forth to meet thee, desiring thy face; and I have found thee.
I have spread my bed with sheets, and I have covered it with double tapestry from Egypt.
I have sprinkled my couch with saffron, and my house with cinnamon.
Come, and let us enjoy love until the morning; come, and let us embrace in love.
For my husband is not at home, but is gone on a long journey,
having taken in his hand a bundle of money: after many days he will return to his house.
So with much converse she prevailed on him to go astray, and with the snares of her lips forced him from the right path.
And he followed her, being gently led on, and that as an ox is led to the slaughter, and as a dog to bonds, or as a hart shot in the liver with an arrow:
and he hastens as a bird into a snare, not knowing that he is running for his life.
Now then, my son, hearken to me, and attend to the words of my mouth.
Let not thine heart turn aside to her ways :
for she has wounded and cast down many, and those whom she has slain are innumerable.
Her house is the way of hell, leading down to the chambers of death.
How amiable are thy tabernacles, O Lord of hosts!
My soul longs, and faints for the courts of the Lord: my heart and my flesh have exulted in the living god.
Yea, the sparrow has found himself a home, and the turtle-dove a nest for herself, where she may lay her young, even thine altars, O Lord of hosts, my King, and my God.
Blessed are they that dwell in thy house: they will praise thee evermore. Pause.
Blessed is the man whose help is of thee, O Lord; in his heart he has purposed to go up
the valley of weeping, to the place which he has appointed, for there the law-giver will grant blessings.
They shall go from strength to strength: the God of gods shall be seen in Sion.
O Lord God of hosts, hear my prayer: hearken, O God of Jacob. Pause.
Behold, O God our defender, and look upon the face of thine anointed.
For one day in thy courts is better than thousands. I would rather be an abject in the house of God, than dwell in the tents of sinners.
For the Lord loves mercy and truth: God will give grace and glory: the Lord will not withhold good things from them that walk in innocence.
O Lord of hosts, blessed is the man that trusts in thee.
Out of the depths have I cried to thee, O Lord.
O Lord, hearken to my voice; let thine ears be attentive to the voice of my supplication.
If thou, O Lord, shouldest mark iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand?
For with thee is forgiveness: for thy name's sake
have I waited for thee, O Lord, my soul has waited for thy word.
My soul has hoped in the Lord; from the morning watch till night.
Let Israel hope in the Lord: for with the Lord is mercy, and with him is plenteous redemption.
And he shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities.
In the first year of Darius the son of Assuerus, of the seed of the Medes, who reigned over the kingdom of the Chaldeans,
I Daniel understood by books the number of the years which was the word of the Lord to the prophet Jeremias, even seventy years for the accomplishment of the desolation of Jerusalem.
And I set my face toward the Lord God, to seek him diligently by prayer and supplications, with fastings and sackcloth.
And I prayed to the Lord my God, and confessed, and said, O Lord, the great and wonderful God, keeping thy covenant and thy mercy to them that love thee, and to them that keep thy commandments; we have sinned,
we have done iniquity, we have transgressed, and we have departed and turned aside from thy commandments and from thy judgments:
and we have not hearkened to thy servants the prophets, who spoke in thy name to our kings, and our princes, and our fathers, and to all the people of the land.
To thee, O Lord, belongs righteousness, an to us confusion of face, as at this day; to the men of Juda, and to the dwellers in Jerusalem, and to all Israel, to them that are near, and to them that are far off in all the earth, wherever thou has scattered them, for the sin which they committed.
In thee, O Lord, is our righteousness, and to us belongs confusion of faced, and to our kings, and to our princes, and to our fathers, forasmuch as we have sinned.
To thee, the Lord our God, belong compassions and forgivenesses, whereas we have departed from thee;
neither have we hearkened to the voice of the Lord our God, to walk in his laws, which he set before us by the hands of his servants the prophets.
Moreover all Israel have transgressed thy law, and have refused to hearken to thy voice; so the curse has come upon us, and the oath that is written in the law of Moses the servant of God, because we have sinned against him.
And he has confirmed his words, which he spoke against us, and against our judges who judged us, by bringing upon us great evils, such as have not happened under the whole heaven, according to what has happened in Jerusalem.
As it is written in the law of Moses, all these evils have come upon us: yet we have not besought the Lord our God, that we might turn away from our iniquities, and have understanding in all thy truth.
The Lord also has watched, and brought the evils upon us: for the Lord our God is righteous in all his work which he has executed, but we have not hearkened to his voice.
And now, O Lord our God, who broughtest thy people out of the land of Egypt with a mighty hand, and madest to thyself a name, as at this day; we have sinned, we have transgressed.
O Lord, thy mercy is over all: let, I pray thee, thy wrath turn away, and thine anger from thy city Jerusalem, even thy holy mountain: for we have sinned, and because of our iniquities, and those of our fathers, Jerusalem and thy people are become a reproach among all that are round about us.
And now, O lord our God, hearken to the prayer of thy servant, and his supplications, and cause thy face to shine on thy desolate sanctuary, for thine own sake, O Lord.
Incline thine ear, O my God, and hear; open thine eyes and behold our desolation, and that of thy city on which thy name is called: for we do not bring our pitiful case before thee on the ground of our righteousness, but on the ground of thy manifold compassions, O Lord.
Hearken, O Lord; be propitious, O Lord; attend, O Lord; delay not, O my God, for thine own sake: for thy name is called upon thy city and upon thy people.
And while I was yet speaking, and praying, and confessing my sins and the sins of my people Israel, and bringing my pitiful case before the Lord my God concerning the holy mountain;
yea, while I was yet speaking in prayer, behold the man Gabriel, whom I had seen in the vision at the beginning, came flying, and he touched me about the hour of the evening sacrifice.
And he instructed me, and spoke with me, and said, O Daniel, I am now come forth to impart to thee understanding.
At the beginning of thy supplication the word came forth, and I am come to tell thee; for thou art a man much beloved: therefore consider the matter, understand the vision.
Seventy weeks have been determined upon thy people, and upon the holy city, for sin to be ended, and to seal up transgressions, and to blot out the iniquities, and to make atonement for iniquities, and to bring in everlasting righteousness, and to seal the vision and the prophet, and to anoint the Most Holy.
And thou shalt know and understand, that from the going forth of the command for the answer and for the building of Jerusalem until Christ the prince there shall be seven weeks, and sixty-two weeks; and then the time shall return, and the street shall be built, and the wall, and the times shall be exhausted.
And after the sixty-two weeks, the anointed one shall be destroyed, and there is no judgment in him: and he shall destroy the city and the sanctuary with the prince that is coming: they shall be cut off with a flood, and to the end of the war which is rapidly completed he shall appoint the city to desolations.
A wise judge will instruct his people; and the government of a prudent man is well ordered.
As the judge of the people is himself, so are his officers; and what manner of man the ruler of the city is, such are all they that dwell therein.
An unwise king destroyeth his people; but through the prudence of them which are in authority the city shall be inhabited.
The power of the earth is in the hand of the Lord, and in due time he will set over it one that is profitable.
In the hand of God is the prosperity of man: and upon the person of the scribe shall he lay his honour.
Bear not hatred to thy neighbour for every wrong; and do nothing at all by injurious practices.
Pride is hateful before God and man: and by both doth one commit iniquity.
Because of unrighteous dealings, injuries, and riches got by deceit, the kingdom is translated from one people to another.
Why is earth and ashes proud? There is not a more wicked thing than a covetous man: for such an one setteth his own soul to sale; because while he liveth he casteth away his bowels.
The physician cutteth off a long disease; and he that is to day a king to morrow shall die.
For when a man is dead, he shall inherit creeping things, beasts, and worms.
The beginning of pride is when one departeth from God, and his heart is turned away from his Maker.
For pride is the beginning of sin, and he that hath it shall pour out abomination: and therefore the Lord brought upon them strange calamities, and overthrew them utterly.
The Lord hath cast down the thrones of proud princes, and set up the meek in their stead.
The Lord hath plucked up the roots of the proud nations, and planted the lowly in their place.
The Lord overthrew countries of the heathen, and destroyed them to the foundations of the earth.
He took some of them away, and destroyed them, and hath made their memorial to cease from the earth.
Pride was not made for men, nor furious anger for them that are born of a woman.
They that fear the Lord are a sure seed, and they that love him an honourable plant: they that regard not the law are a dishonourable seed; they that transgress the commandments are a deceivable seed.
Among brethren he that is chief is honourably; so are they that fear the Lord in his eyes.
Whether he be rich, noble, or poor, their glory is the fear of the Lord.
It is not meet to despise the poor man that hath understanding; neither is it convenient to magnify a sinful man.
Great men, and judges, and potentates, shall be honoured; yet is there none of them greater than he that feareth the Lord.
Unto the servant that is wise shall they that are free do service: and he that hath knowledge will not grudge when he is reformed.
Be not overwise in doing thy business; and boast not thyself in the time of thy distress.
Better is he that laboureth, and aboundeth in all things, than he that boasteth himself, and wanteth bread.
My son, glorify thy soul in meekness, and give it honour according to the dignity thereof.
Who will justify him that sinneth against his own soul? and who will honour him that dishonoureth his own life?
He that is honoured in poverty, how much more in riches? and he that is dishonourable in riches, how much more in poverty?
Strengthen yourselves, ye children of Benjamin, to flee out of the midst of Jerusalem, and sound an alarm with the trumpet in Thecue, and set up a signal over Baethacharma: for evil threatens from the north, and a great destruction is coming.
And thy pride, O daughter of Sion, shall be taken away.
And I allowed my wrath to come to full, yet I kept it in, and did not utterly destroy them: I will pour it out on the children without, and on the assembly of young men together: for man and woman shall be taken together, the old man with him that is full of days.
Hear, O earth: behold, I will bring evils upon this people, even the fruit of their rebellions; for they have not heeded my words, and they have rejected my law.
Wherefore do ye bring me frankincense from Saba, and cinnamon from a land afar off? your whole-burnt-offerings are not acceptable, and your sacrifices have not been pleasant to me.
Therefore thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will bring weakness upon this people, and the fathers and sons shall be weak together; the neighbour and his friend shall perish.
Thus saith the Lord, Behold, a people comes from the north, and nations shall be stirred up from the end of the earth.
They shall lay hold on bow and spear; the people is fierce, and will have no mercy; their voice is as the roaring sea; they shall array themselves for war against thee as fire on horses and chariots, O daughter of Sion.
O daughter of my people, gird thyself with sackcloth: sprinkle thyself with ashes; make for thyself pitiable lamentation, as the mourning for a beloved son: for misery will come suddenly upon you.
Call ye them reprobate silver, because the Lord has rejected them.
And it came to pass, after Israel was taken captive, and Jerusalem made desolate, that Jeremias sat weeping, and lamented with this lamentation over Jerusalem, and said, ALEPH. How does the city that was filled with people sit solitary! she is become as a widow: she that was magnified among the nations, and princess among the provinces, has become tributary.
BETH. She weeps sore in the night, and her tears are on her cheeks; and there is none of all her lovers to comfort her: all that were her friends have dealt deceitfully with her, they are become her enemies.
GIMEL. Judea is gone into captivity by reason of her affliction, and by reason of the abundance of her servitude: she dwells among the nations, she has not found rest: all her pursuers have overtaken her between her oppressors.
DALETH. The ways of Sion mourn, because there are none that come to the feast: all her gates are ruined: her priests groan, her virgins are led captive, and she is in bitterness in herself.
HE. Her oppressors are become the head, and her enemies have prospered; for the Lord has afflicted her because of the multitude of her sins: her young children are gone into captivity before the face of the oppressor.
VAU. And all her beauty has been taken away from the daughter of Sion: her princes were as rams finding no pasture, and are gone away in weakness before the face of the pursuer.
ZAIN. Jerusalem remembered the days of her affliction, and her rejection; she thought on all her desirable things which were from the days of old, when her people fell into the hands of the oppressor, and there was none to help her: when her enemies saw it they laughed at her habitation.
HETH. Jerusalem has sinned a great sin; therefore has she come into tribulation, all that used to honour her have afflicted her, for they have seen her shame: yea, she herself groaned, and turned backward.
TETH. Her uncleanness is before her feet; she remembered not her last end; she has lowered her boasting tone, there is none to comfort her. Behold, O Lord, my affliction: for the enemy has magnified himself.
JOD. The oppressor has stretched out his hand on all her desirable things: for she has seen the Gentiles entering into her sanctuary, concerning whom thou didst command that they should not enter into thy congregation.
CHAPH. All her people groan, seeking bread: they have given their desirable things for meat, to restore their soul: behold, Lord, and look; for she is become dishonoured.
LAMED. All ye that pass by the way, turn, and see if there is sorrow like to my sorrow, which has happened to me. The Lord who spoke by me has afflicted me in the day of his fierce anger.
MEM. He has sent fire from his lofty habitation, he has brought it into my bones: he has spread a net for my feet, he has turned me back: he has made me desolate and mourning all the day.
NUN. He has watched over my sins, they are twined about my hands, they have come up on my neck: my strength has failed; for the Lord has laid pains on my hands, I shall not be able to stand.
SAMECH. The Lord has cut off all my strong men from the midst of me: he has summoned against me a time for crushing my choice men: the Lord has trodden a wine-press for the virgin daughter of Juda: for these things I weep.
AIN. Mine eye has poured out water, because he that should comfort me, that should restore my soul, has been removed far from me: my sons have been destroyed, because the enemy has prevailed.
PHE. Sion has spread out her hand, and there is none to comfort her: the Lord has commanded concerning Jacob, his oppressors are round about him: Jerusalem has become among them as a removed woman.
KOPH. I called my lovers, but they deceived me: my priests and my elders failed in the city; for they sought meat that they might restore their souls, and found it not.
RHECHS. Behold, O Lord; for I am afflicted: my belly is troubled, and my heart is turned within me; for I have been grievously rebellious: abroad the sword has bereaved me, even as death at home.
CHSEN. Hear, I pray you, for I groan: there is none to comfort me: all mine enemies have heard of mine afflictions, and rejoice because thou hast done it: thou hast brought on the day, thou hast called the time: they are become like to me.
THAU. Let all their wickedness come before thy face; and strip them, as they have made a gleaning for all my sins: for my groans are many, and my heart is grieved.
And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the children of Israel, and thou shalt say to them, Whatsoever woman shall have conceived and born a male child shall be unclean seven days, she shall be unclean according to the days of separation for her monthly courses.
And on the eighth day she shall circumcise the flesh of his foreskin.
And for thirty-three days she shall continue in her unclean blood; she shall touch nothing holy, and shall not enter the sanctuary, until the days of her purification be fulfilled.
But if she should have born a female child, then she shall be unclean twice seven days, according to the time of her monthly courses; and for sixty-six days shall she remain in her unclean blood.
And when the days of her purification shall have been fulfilled for a son or a daughter, she shall bring a lamb of a year old without blemish for a whole-burnt-offering, and a young pigeon or turtle-dove for a sin-offering to the door of the tabernacle of witness, to the priest.
And he shall present it before the Lord, and the priest shall make atonement for her, and shall purge her from the fountain of her blood; this is the law of her who bears a male or a female.
And if she cannot afford a lamb, then shall she take two turtle-doves or two young pigeons, one for a whole-burnt-offering, and one for a sin-offering; and the priest shall make atonement for her, and she shall be purified.
And it came to pass after these things, that it was reported to Joseph, Behold, thy father is ill; and, having taken his two sons, Manasse and Ephraim, he came to Jacob.
And it was reported to Jacob, saying, Behold, thy son Joseph cometh to thee; and Israel having strengthened himself, sat upon the bed.
And Jacob said to Joseph, My God appeared to me in Luza, in the land of Chanaan, and blessed me,
and said to me, Behold, I will increase thee, and multiply thee, and will make of thee multitudes of nations; and I will give this land to thee, and to thy seed after thee, for an everlasting possession.
Now then thy two sons, who were born to thee in the land of Egypt, before I came to thee into Egypt, are mine; Ephraim and Manasse, as Ruben and Symeon they shall be mine.
And the children which thou shalt beget hereafter, shall be in the name of their brethren; they shall be named after their inheritances.
And as for me, when I came out of Mesopotamia of Syria, Rachel, thy mother, died in the land of Chanaan, as I drew night to the horse-course of Chabratha of the land , so as to come to Ephratha; and I buried her in the road of the course; this is Bethlehem.
And when Israel saw the sons of Joseph, he said, Who are these to thee?
And Joseph said to his father, They are my sons, whom God gave me here; and Jacob said, Bring me them, that I may bless them.
Now the eyes of Israel were dim through age, and he could not see; and he brought them near to him, and he kissed them, and embraced them.
And Israel said to Joseph, Behold, I have not been deprived of thy face, and lo! God has showed me thy seed also.
And Joseph brought them out from his knees, and they did reverence to him, with their face to the ground.
And Joseph took his two sons, both Ephraim in his right hand, but on the left of Israel, and Manasse on his left hand, but on the right of Israel, and brought them near to him.
But Israel having stretched out his right hand, laid it on the head of Ephraim, and he was the younger; and his left hand on the head of Manasse, his hands crosswise.
And he blessed them and said, The God in whose sight my fathers were well pleasing, Abraam and Isaac, the God who continues to feed me from my youth until this day;
the angel who delivers me from all evils, bless these boys, and my name shall be called upon them, and the name of my fathers, Abraam and Isaac; and let them be increased to a great multitude on the earth.
And Joseph having seen that his father put his right hand on the head of Ephraimit seemed grievous to him; and Joseph took hold of the hand of his father, to remove it from the head of Ephraim to the head of Manasse.
And Joseph said to his father, Not so, father; for this is the first-born; lay thy right-hand upon his head.
And he would not, but said, I know it, son, I know it; he also shall be a people, and he shall be exalted, but his younger brother shall be greater than he, and his seed shall become a multitude of nations.
And Samuel said to all Israel, Behold, I have hearkened to your voice in all things that ye have said to me, and I have set a king over you.
And now, behold, the king goes before you; and I am grown old and shall rest; and, behold, my sons are among you; and, behold, I have gone about before you from my youth to this day.
Behold, here am I, answer against me before the Lord and before his anointed: whose calf have I taken? or whose ass have I taken? or whom of you have I oppressed? or from whose hand have I taken a bribe, even to a sandal? bear witness against me, and I will make restitution to you.
And they said to Samuel, Thou hast not injured us, and thou hast not oppressed us; and thou hast not afflicted us, and thou hast not taken anything from any one's hand.
And Samuel said to the people, The Lord is witness among you, and his anointed is witness this day, that ye have not found anything in my hand: and they said, He is witness.
And Samuel spoke to the people, saying, The Lord who appointed Moses and Aaron is witness, who brought our fathers up out of Egypt.
And now stand still, and I will judge you before the Lord; and I will relate to you all the righteousness of the Lord, the things which he has wrought among you and your fathers.
When Jacob and his sons went into Egypt, and Egypt humbled them, then our fathers cried to the Lord, and the Lord sent Moses and Aaron; and they brought our fathers out of Egypt, and he made them to dwell in this place.
And they forgot the Lord their God, and he sold them into the hands of Sisara captain of the host of Jabis king of Asor, and into the hands of the Philistines, and into the hands of the king of Moab; and he fought with them.
And they cried to the Lord, and said, We have sinned, for we have forsaken the Lord, and have served Baalim and the groves: and now deliver us out of the hand of our enemies, and we will serve thee.
And he sent Jerobaal, and Barac, and Jephthae, and Samuel, and rescued us out of the hand of our enemies round about, and ye dwelt in security.
And ye saw that Naas king of the children of Ammon came against you, and ye said, Nay, none but a king shall reign over us; whereas the Lord our God is our king.
And now behold the king whom ye have chosen; and behold, the Lord has set a king over you.
If ye should fear the Lord, and serve him, and hearken to his voice, and not resist the mouth of the Lord, and ye and your king that reigns over you should follow the Lord, well.
But if ye should not hearken to the voice of the Lord, and ye should resist the mouth of the Lord, then shall the hand of the Lord be upon you and upon your king.
And now stand still, and see this great thing, which the Lord will do before your eyes.
Is it not wheat-harvest to-day? I will call upon the Lord, and he shall send thunder and rain; and know ye and see, that your wickedness is great which ye have wrought before the Lord, having asked for yourselves a king.
And Samuel called upon the Lord, and the Lord sent thunders and rain in that day; and all the people feared greatly the Lord and Samuel.
And all the people said to Samuel, Pray for thy servants to the Lord thy God, and let us not die; for we have added to all our sins this iniquity, in asking for us a king.
And Samuel said to the people, Fear not: ye have indeed wrought all this iniquity; only turn not from following the Lord, and serve the Lord with all your heart.
And turn not aside after the gods that are nothing, who will do nothing, and will not deliver you, because they are nothing.
For the Lord will not cast off his people for his great name's sake, because the Lord graciously took you to himself for a people.
And far be it from me to sin against the Lord in ceasing to pray for you: but I will serve the Lord, and shew you the good and the right way.
Only fear the Lord, and serve him in truth and with all your heart, for ye see what great things he has wrought with you.
But if ye continue to do evil, then shall ye and your king be consumed.
Weary in my soul, I will pour my words with groans upon him: I will speak being straitened in the bitterness of my soul.
And I will say to the Lord, Do not teach me to be impious; and wherefore hast thou thus judged me?
Is it good before thee if I be unrighteous? for thou hast disowned the work of thy hands, and attended to the counsel of the ungodly.
Or dost thou see as a mortal sees? or wilt thou look as a man sees?
Or is thy life human, or thy years the years of a man,
that thou hast enquired into mine iniquity, and searched out my sins?
For thou knowest that I have not committed iniquity: but who is he that can deliver out of thy hands?
Thy hands have formed me and made me; afterwards thou didst change thy mind, and smite me.
Remember that thou hast made me as clay, and thou dost turn me again to earth.
Hast thou not poured me out like milk, and curdled me like cheese?
And thou didst clothe me with skin and flesh, and frame me with bones and sinews.
And thou didst bestow upon me life and mercy, and thy oversight has preserved my spirit.
Having these things in thyself, I know that thou canst do all things; for nothing is impossible with thee.
And if I should sin, thou watchest me; and thou hast not cleared me from iniquity.
Or if I should be ungodly, woe is me: and if I should be righteous, I cannot lift myself up, for I am full of dishonour.
For I am hunted like a lion for slaughter; for again thou hast changed and art terribly destroying me;
renewing against me my torture: and thou hast dealt with me in great anger, and thou hast brought trials upon me.
Why then didst thou bring me out of the womb? and why did I not die, and no eye see me,
and I become as if I had not been? for why was I not carried from the womb to the grave?
Is not the time of my life short? suffer me to rest a little,
before I go whence I shall not return, to a land of darkness and gloominess;
And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying,
Do thou also charge the children of Israel, saying, Take heed and keep my sabbaths; for they are a sign with me and among you throughout your generations, that ye may know that I am the Lord that sanctifies you.
And ye shall keep the sabbaths, because this is holy to the Lord for you; he that profanes it shall surely be put to death: every one who shall do a work on it, that soul shall be destroyed from the midst of his people.
Six days thou shalt do works, but the seventh day is the sabbath, a holy rest to the Lord; every one who shall do a work on the seventh day shall be put to death.
And the children of Israel shall keep the sabbaths, to observe them throughout their generations.
It is a perpetual covenant with me and the children of Israel, it is a perpetual sign with me; for in six days the Lord made the heaven and the earth, and on the seventh day he ceased, and rested.
And he gave to Moses when he left off speaking to him in mount Sina the two tables of testimony, tables of stone written upon with the finger of God.
I will love thee, O Lord, my strength.
The Lord is my firm support, and my refuge, and my deliverer; my God is my helper, I will hope in him; he is my defender, and the horn of my salvation, and my helper.
I will call upon the Lord with praises, and I shall be saved from mine enemies.
The pangs of death compassed me, and the torrents of ungodliness troubled me exceedingly.
The pangs of hell came round about me: the snares of death prevented me.
And when I was afflicted I called upon the Lord, and cried to my God: he heard my voice out of this holy temple, and my cry shall enter before him, even into his ears.
Then the earth shook and quaked, and the foundations of the mountains were disturbed, and were shaken, because God was angry with them.
There went up a smoke in his wrath, and fire burst into a flame at his presence: coals were kindled at it.
And he bowed the heaven, and came down: and thick darkness was under his feet.
And he mounted on cherubs and flew: he flew on the wings of winds.
And he made darkness his secret place: round about him was his tabernacle, even dark water in the clouds of the air.
At the brightness before him the clouds passed, hail and coals of fire.
The Lord also thundered from heaven, and the Highest uttered his voice.
And he sent forth his weapons, and scattered them; and multiplied lightnings, and routed them.
And the springs of waters appeared, and the foundations of the world were exposed, at thy rebuke, O Lord, at the blasting of the breath of thy wrath.
He sent from on high and took me, he drew me to himself out of many waters.
He will deliver me from my mighty enemies, and from them that hate me; for they are stronger than I.
They prevented me in the day of mine affliction: but the Lord was my stay against them.
And he brought me out into a wide place: he will deliver me, because he has pleasure in me.
And the Lord will recompense me according to my righteousness; even according to the purity of my hands will he recompense me.
For I have kept the way of the Lord and have not wickedly departed from my God.
For all his judgments were before me, and his ordinances departed not from me.
And I shall be blameless with hem, and shall keep myself from mine iniquity.
And the Lord shall recompense me according to my righteousness, and according to the purity of my hands before his eyes.
With the holy thou wilt be holy; and with the innocent man thou wilt be innocent.
And with the excellent man thou wilt be excellent; and with the perverse thou wilt shew frowardness.
For thou wilt save the lowly people, and wilt humble the eyes of the proud.
For thou, O Lord, wilt light my lamp: my God, thou wilt lighten my darkness.
For by thee shall I be delivered from a troop; and by my God I will pass over a wall.
As for my God, his way is perfect: the oracles of the Lord are tried in the fire; he is a protector of all them that hope in him.
For who is God but the Lord? and who is a God except our God?
It is God that girds me with strength, and has made my way blameless:
who strengthens my feet as hart's feet, and sets me upon high places.
He instructs my hands for war: and thou hast made my arms as a brazen bow.
And thou hast made me secure in my salvation: and thy right hand has helped me, and thy correction has upheld me to the end; yea, thy correction itself shall instruct me.
Thou has made room for my goings under me, and by footsteps did not fail.
I will pursue mine enemies, and overtake them; and I will not turn back until they are consumed.
I will dash them to pieces and they shall not be able to stand: they shall fall under my feet.
For thou hast girded me with strength for war: thou hast beaten down under me all that rose up against me.
And thou has made mine enemies turn their backs before me; and thou hast destroyed them that hated me.
They cried, but there was no deliverer: even to the Lord, but he hearkened not to them.
I will grind them as the mud of the streets: and I will beat them small as dust before the wind.
Deliver me from the gain sayings of the people: thou shalt make me head of the Gentiles: a people whom I knew not served me,
at the hearing of the ear they obeyed me: the strange children lied to me.
The strange children waxed old, and fell away from their paths through lameness.
The Lord lives; and blessed be my God; and let the God of my salvation be exalted.
It is God that avenges me, and has subdued the nations under me;
my deliverer from angry enemies: thou shalt set me on high above them that rise up against me: thou shalt deliver me from the unrighteous man.
Therefore will I confess to thee, O Lord, among the Gentiles, and sing to thy name.
God magnifies the deliverances of his king; and deals mercifully with David his anointed, and his seed, for ever.
And Jacob lifted up his eyes, and beheld, and lo! Esau his brother coming, and four hundred men with him; and Jacob divided the children to Lea and to Rachel, and the two handmaidens.
And he put the two handmaidens and their children with the first, and Lea and her children behind, and Rachel and Joseph last.
And Esau looked up and saw the women and the children, and said, What are these to thee? And he said, The children with which God has mercifully blessed thy servant.
And the maid-servants and their children drew near and did reverence.
And Lea and her children drew near and did reverence; and after this drew near Rachel and Joseph, and did reverence.
Blessed is the man who thinks, on the poor and needy: the Lord shall deliver him in an evil day.
May the Lord preserve him and keep him alive, and bless him on the earth, and not deliver him into the hands of his enemy.
May the Lord help him upon the bed of his pain; thou hast made all his bed in his sickness.
I said, O Lord, have mercy upon me; heal my soul; for I have sinned against thee.
Mine enemies have spoken evil against me, saying, When shall he die, and his name perish?
And if he came to see me, his heart spoke vainly; he gathered iniquity to himself; he went forth and spoke in like manner.
All my enemies whispered against me; against me they devised my hurt.
They denounced a wicked word against me, saying, Now that he lies, shall he not rise up again?
For even the man of my peace, in whom I trusted, who ate my bread, lifted up his heel against me.
But thou, O Lord, have compassion upon me, and raise me up, and I shall requite them.
By this I know that thou hast delighted in me, because mine enemy shall not rejoice over me.
But thou didst help me because of mine innocence, and hast established me before thee for ever.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel from everlasting, and to everlasting. So be it, so be it.
Woe to the apostate children, saith the Lord: ye have framed counsel, not by me, and covenants not by my Spirit, to add sins to sins:
even they that proceed to go down into Egypt, but they have not enquired of me, that they might be helped by Pharao, and protected by the Egyptians.
For the protection of Pharaoh shall be to you a disgrace, and there shall be a reproach to them that trust in Egypt.
For there are princes in Tanes, evil messengers.
In vain shall they labour in seeking to a people, which shall not profit them for help, but shall be for a shame and reproach.
THE VISION OF THE QUADRUPEDS IN THE DESERT. In affliction and distress, where are the lion and lion's whelp, thence come also asps, and the young of flying asps, there shall they be who bore their wealth on asses and camels to a nation which shall not profit them.
The Egyptians shall help you utterly in vain: tell them, This your consolation is vain.
Now then sit down and write these words on a tablet, and in a book; for these things shall be for many long days, and even for ever.
For the people is disobedient, false children, who would not hear the law of God:
who say to the prophets, Report not to us; and to them that see visions, Speak them not to us, but speak and report to us another error;
and turn us aside from this way; remove from us this path, and remove from us the oracle of Israel.
Therefore thus saith the Holy One of Israel, Because ye have refused to obey these words, and have trusted in falsehood; and because thou hast murmured, and been confident in this respect:
therefore shall this sin be to you as a wall suddenly falling when a strong city has been taken, of which the fall is very near at hand.
And the fall thereof shall be as the breaking of an earthen vessel, as small fragments of a pitcher, so that thou shouldest not find among them a sherd, with which thou mightest take up fire, and with which thou shouldest draw a little water.
Thus saith the Lord, the Holy Lord of Israel; When thou shalt turn and mourn, then thou shalt be saved; and thou shalt know where thou wast, when thou didst trust in vanities: then your strength became vain, yet ye would not hearken:
but ye said, We will flee upon horses; therefore shall ye flee: and, We will be aided by swift riders; therefore shall they that pursue you be swift.
A thousand shall flee because of the voice of one, and many shall flee on account of the voice of five; until ye be left as a signal-post upon a mountain, and as one bearing an ensign upon a hill.
And the Lord will again wait, that he may pity you, and will therefore be exalted that he may have mercy upon you: because the Lord your God is a judge: blessed are they that stay themselves upon him.
For the holy people shall dwell in Sion: and whereas Jerusalem has wept bitterly, saying, Pity me; he shall pity thee: when he perceived the voice of thy cry, he hearkened to thee.
And though the Lord shall give you the bread of affliction and scant water, yet they that cause thee to err shall no more at all draw nigh to thee; for thine eyes shall see those that cause thee to err,
and thine ears shall hear the words of them that went after thee to lead thee astray, who say, This is the way, let us walk in it, whether to the right or to the left.
And thou shalt pollute the plated idols, and thou shalt grind to powder the gilt ones, and shalt scatter them as the water of a removed woman, and thou shalt thrust them forth as dung.
Then shall there be rain to the seed of thy land; and the bread of the fruit of thy land shall be plenteous and rich: and thy cattle shall feed in that day in a fertile and spacious place.
Your bulls and your oxen that till the ground, shall eat chaff mixed with winnowed barley.
And there shall be upon every lofty mountain and upon every high hill, water running in that day, when many shall perish, and when the towers shall fall.
And the light of the moon shall be as the light of the sun, and the light of the sun shall be sevenfold in the day when the Lord shall heal the breach of his people, and shall heal the pain of thy wound.
Behold, the name of the Lord comes after a long time, burning wrath: the word of his lips is with glory, a word full of anger, and the anger of his wrath shall devour as fire.
And his breath, as rushing water in a valley, shall reach as far as the neck, and be divided, to confound the nations for their vain error: error also shall pursue them, and overtake them.
Must ye always rejoice, and go into my holy places continually, as they that keep a feast? and must ye go with a pipe, as those that rejoice, into the mountain of the Lord, to the God of Israel?
And the Lord shall make his glorious voice to be heard, and the wrath of his arm, to make a display with wrath and anger and devouring flame: he shall lighten terribly, and his wrath shall be as water and violent hail.
For by the voice of the Lord the Assyrians shall be overcome, even by the stroke wherewith he shall smite them.
And it shall happen to him from every side, that they from whom their hope of assistance was, in which he trusted, themselves shall war against him in turn with drums and with harp.
For thou shalt be required before thy time: has it been prepared for thee also to reign? nay, God has prepared for thee a deep trench, wood piled, fire and much wood: the wrath of the Lord shall be as a trench kindled with sulphur.
Give thanks to the Lord; for he is good: for his mercy endures for ever.
Who shall tell the mighty acts of the Lord? who shall cause all his praises to be heard?
Blessed are they that keep judgment, and do righteousness at all times.
Remember us, O Lord, with the favour thou hast to thy people: visit us with thy salvation;
that we may behold the good of thine elect, that we may rejoice in the gladness of thy nation, that we may glory with thine inheritance.
We have sinned with our fathers, we have transgressed, we have done unrighteously.
Our fathers in Egypt understood not thy wonders, and remembered not the multitude of thy mercy; but provoked him as they went up by the Red Sea.
Yet he saved them for his name's sake, that he might cause his mighty power to be known.
And he rebuked the Red Sea, and it was dried up: so he led them through the deep as through the wilderness.
And he saved them out of the hand of them that hated them, and redeemed them out of the hand of the enemy.
The water covered those that oppressed them: there was not one of them left.
Then they believed his words, and celebrated his praise.
They made haste, they forgot his works; they waited not for his counsel.
And they lusted exceedingly in the wilderness, and tempted God in the dry land.
And he gave them their request, and sent fullness into their souls.
They provoked Moses also in the camp, and Aaron the holy one of the Lord.
The earth opened and swallowed up Dathan, and closed upon the congregation of Abiron.
And a fire was kindled in their congregation, and a flame burnt up the sinners.
And they made a calf in Choreb, and worshipped the graven image,
and they changed their glory into the similitude of a calf that feeds on grass.
They forgot God that saved them, who had wrought great deeds in Egypt;
wondrous works in the land of Cham, and terrible things at the Red Sea.
So he said that he would have destroyed them, had not Moses his chosen stood before him in the breach, to turn him away from the fierceness of his anger, so that he should not destroy them.
Moreover they set at nought the desirable land, and believed not his word.
And they murmured in their tents: they hearkened not to the voice of the Lord.
So he lifted up his hand against them, to cast them down in the wilderness;
and to cast down their seed among the nations, and to scatter them in the countries.
They were joined also to Beelphegor, and ate the sacrifices of the dead. And they provoked him with their devices;
and destruction, was multiplied among them.
Then Phinees stood up, and made atonement: and the plague ceased.
And it was counted to him for righteousness, to all generations for ever.
They provoked him also at the water of Strife, and Moses was hurt for their sakes;
for they provoked his spirit, and he spoke unadvisedly with his lips.
They destroyed not the nations which the Lord told them to destroy;
but were mingled with the heathen, and learned their works.
And they served their graven images; and it became an offence to them.
And they sacrificed their sons and their daughters to devils,
and shed innocent blood, the blood of their sons and daughters, whom they sacrificed to the idols of Chanaan; and the land was defiled with blood.
and was polluted with their works; and they went a whoring with their own devices.
So the Lord was very angry with his people, and he abhorred his inheritance.
And he delivered them into the hands of their enemies; and they that hated them ruled over them.
Ands their enemies oppressed them, and they were brought down under their hands.
Many a time he delivered them; but they provoked him by their counsel, and they were brought low by their iniquities.
Ye the Lord looked upon their affliction, when he heard their petition.
And he remembered his covenant, and repented according to the multitude of his mercy.
And he caused them to be pitied in the sight of all who carried them captive.
Save us, O Lord our God, and gather us from among the heathen, that we may give thanks to thy holy name, that we may glory in thy praise.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel from everlasting and to everlasting; and all the people shall say, Amen, Amen.
And when the people had completely passed over Jordan, the Lord spoke to Joshua, saying,
Take men from the people, one of each tribe,
and charge them; and ye shall take out of the midst of Jordan twelve fit stones, and having carried them across together with yourselves, place them in your camp, where ye shall encamp for the night.
And Joshua having called twelve men of distinction among the children of Israel, one of each tribe,
said to them, Advance before me in the presence of the Lord into the midst of Jordan, and each having taken up a stone from thence, let him carry it on his shoulders, according to the number of the twelve tribes of Israel:
that these may be to you continually for an appointed sign, that when thy son asks thee in future, saying, What are these stones to us?
then thou mayest explain to thy son, saying, The river Jordan was dried up from before the ark of the covenant of the Lord of the whole earth, when it passed it: and these stones shall be for a memorial for you for the children of Israel for ever.
And the children of Israel did so, as the Lord commanded Joshua; and they took up twelve stones out of the midst of Jordan, (as the Lord commanded Joshua, when the children of Israel had completely passed over,) and carried these stones with them into the camp, and laid them down there.
And Joshua set also other twelve stones in Jordan itself, in the place that was under the feet of the priests that bore the ark of the covenant of the Lord; and there they are to this day.
And the priests that bore the ark of the covenant stood in Jordan, until Joshua had finished all that the Lord commanded him to report to the people; and the people hasted and passed over.
And it came to pass when all the people had passed over, that the ark of the covenant of the Lord passed over, and the stones before them.
And the sons of Ruben, and the sons of Gad, and the half tribe of Manasse passed over armed before the children of Israel, as Moses commanded them.
Forty thousand armed for battle went over before the Lord to war, to the city of Jericho.
In that day the Lord magnified Joshua before all the people of Israel; and they feared him, as they did Moses, as long as he lived.
And the Lord spoke to Joshua, saying,
Charge the priests that bear the ark of the covenant of the testimony of the Lord, to go up out of Jordan.
And Joshua charged the priests, saying, Go up out of Jordan.
And it came to pass when the priests who bore the ark of the covenant of the Lord were gone up out of Jordan, and set their feet upon the land, that the water of Jordan returned impetuously to its place, and went as before over all its banks.
And the people went up out of Jordan on the tenth day of the first month; and the children of Israel encamped in Galgala in the region eastward from Jericho.
And Joshua set these twelve stones which he took out of Jordan, in Galgala,
saying, When your sons ask you, saying, What are these stones?
Tell your sons, that Israel went over this Jordan on dry land,
when the Lord our God had dried up the water of Jordan from before them, until they had passed over; as the Lord our God did to the Red Sea, which the Lord our God dried up from before us, until we passed over.
That all the nations of the earth might know, that the power of the Lord is mighty, and that ye might worship the Lord our God in every work.
Have mercy, upon me, O God, have mercy upon me: for my soul has trusted in thee: and in the shadow of thy wings will I hope, until the iniquity have passed away.
I will cry to God most high; the God who has benefited me. Pause.
He sent from heaven and saved me; he gave to reproach them that trampled on me: God has sent forth his mercy and his truth;
and he has delivered my soul from the midst of lions'whelps: I lay down to sleep, though troubled. As for the sons of men, their teeth are arms and missile weapons, and their tongue a sharp sword.
Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens; and thy glory above all the earth.
They have prepared snares for my feet, and have bowed down my soul: they have dug a pit before my face, and fallen into it themselves. Pause.
My heart, O God, is ready, my heart is ready: I will sing, yea will sing psalms.
Awake, my glory; awake, psaltery and harp: I will awake early.
O Lord, I will give thanks to thee among the nations: I will sing to thee among the Gentiles.
For thy mercy has been magnified even to the heavens, and thy truth to the clouds.
Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens; and thy glory above all the earth.
At the going forth of Israel from Egypt, of the house of Jacob from a barbarous people,
Judea became his sanctuary, and Israel his dominion.
The sea saw and fled: Jordan was turned back.
The mountains skipped like rams, and the hills like lambs.
What ailed thee, O sea, that thou fleddest? and thou Jordan, that thou wast turned back?
Ye mountains, that ye skipped like rams, and ye hills, like lambs?
The earth trembled at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the God of Jacob;
who turned the rock into pools of water, and the flint into fountains of water.
In that day they shall sing this song in the land of Judea; Behold a strong city; and he shall make salvation its wall and bulwark.
Open ye the gates, let the nation enter that keeps righteousness, and keeps truth,
supporting truth, and keeping peace: for on thee, O Lord,
they have trusted with confidence for ever, the great, the eternal God;
who hast humbled and brought down them that dwell on high, thou shalt cast down strong cities, and bring them to the ground.
And the feet of the meek and lowly shall trample them.
The way of the godly is made straight: the way of the godly is also prepared.
For the way of the Lord is judgment: we have hoped in thy name, and on the remembrance of thee,
which our soul longs for: my spirit seeks thee very early in the morning, O God, for thy commandments are a light on the earth: learn righteousness, ye that dwell upon the earth.
For the ungodly one is put down: no one who will not learn righteousness on the earth, shall be able to do the truth: let the ungodly be taken away, that he see not the glory of the Lord.
O Lord, thine arm is exalted, yet they knew it not: but when they know they shall be ashamed: jealousy shall seize upon an untaught nation, and now fire shall devour the adversaries.
O Lord our God, give us peace: for thou hast rendered to us all things.
O Lord our God, take possession of us: O Lord, we know not any other beside thee: we name thy name.
But the dead shall not see life, neither shall physicians by any means raise them up: therefore thou hast brought wrath upon them, and slain them, and hast taken away every male of them. Bring more evils upon them, O Lord;
bring more evils on the glorious ones of the earth.
Lord, in affliction I remembered thee; thy chastening was to us with small affliction.
And as a woman in travail draws nigh to be delivered, and cries out in her pain; so have we been to thy beloved.
We have conceived, O Lord, because of thy fear, and have been in pain, and have brought forth the breath of thy salvation, which we have wrought upon the earth: we shall not fall, but all that dwell upon the land shall fall.
The dead shall rise, and they that are in the tombs shall be raised, and they that are in the earth shall rejoice: for the dew from thee is healing to them: but the land of the ungodly shall perish.
Go, my people, enter into thy closets, shut thy door, hide thyself for a little season, until the anger of the Lord have passed away.
For, behold, the Lord is bringing wrath from his holy place upon the dwellers on the earth: the earth also shall disclose her blood, and shall not cover her slain.
And these are the kings of the land, whom the children of Israel slew, and inherited their land beyond Jordan from the east, from the valley of Arnon to the mount of Aermon, and all the land of Araba on the east.
Seon king of the Amorites, who dwelt in Esebon, ruling from Arnon, which is in the valley, on the side of the valley, and half of Galaad as far as Jaboc, the borders of the children of Ammon.
And Araba as far as the sea of Chenereth eastward, and as far as the sea of Araba; the salt sea eastward by the way to Asimoth, from Thaeman under Asedoth Phasga.
And Og king of Basan, who dwelt in Astaroth and in Edrain, was left of the giants
ruling from mount Aermon and from Secchai, and over all the land of Basan to the borders of Gergesi, and Machi, and the half of Galaad of the borders of Seon king of Esebon.
Moses the servant of the Lord and the children of Israel smote them; and Moses gave them by way of inheritance to Ruben, and Gad, and to the half tribe of Manasse.
And these are the kings of the Amorites, whom Joshua and the children of Israel slew beyond Jordan by the sea of Balagad in the plain of Libanus, and as far as the mountain of Chelcha, as men go up to Seir: and Joshua gave it to the tribes of Israel to inherit according to their portion;
in the mountain, and in the plain, and in Araba, and in Asedoth, and in the wilderness, and Nageb; the Chettite, and the Amorite, and the Chananite, and the Pherezite, and the Evite, and the Jebusite.
The king of Jericho, and the king of Gai, which is near Baethel;
the king of Jerusalem, the king of Chebron,
the king of Jerimuth, the king of Lachis;
the king of Aelam, the king of Gazer;
the king of Dabir, the king of Gader:
the king of Hermath, the king of Ader;
the king of Lebna, the king of Odollam,
the king of Elath,
the king of Taphut, the king of Opher,
the king of Ophec of Aroc,
the king of Asom,
the king of Symoon, the king of Mambroth, the king of Aziph,
the king of Cades, the king of Zachac,
the king of Maredoth, the king of Jecom of Chermel,
the king of Odollam belonging to Phennealdor, the king of Gei of Galilee:
the king of Thersa: all these were twenty-nine kings.
The Song of songs, which is Solomon's.
Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth: for thy breasts are better than wine.
And the smell of thine ointments is better than all spices: thy name is ointment poured forth; therefore do the young maidens love thee.
They have drawn thee: we will run after thee, for the smell of thine ointments: the king has brought me into closet: let us rejoice and be glad in thee; we will love thy breasts more than wine: righteousness loves thee.
I am black, but beautiful, ye daughters of Jerusalem, as the tents of Kedar, as the curtains of Solomon.
Look not upon me, because I am dark, because the sun has looked unfavourably upon me: my mother's sons strove with me; they made me keeper in the vineyards; I have not kept my own vineyard.
Tell me, thou whom my soul loves, where thou tendest thy flock, where thou causest them to rest at noon, lest I become as one that is veiled by the flocks of thy companions.
If thou know not thyself, thou fair one among women, go thou forth by the footsteps of the flocks, and feed thy kids by the shepherd's tents.
I have likened thee, my companion, to my horses in the chariots of Pharao.
How are thy cheeks beautiful as those of a dove, thy neck as chains!
We will make thee figures of gold with studs of silver.
So long as the king was at table, my spikenard gave forth its smell.
My kinsman is to me a bundle of myrrh; he shall lie between my breasts.
My kinsman is to me a cluster of camphor in the vineyards of Engaddi.
Behold, thou art fair, my companion; behold, thou art fair; thine eyes are doves.
Behold, thou art fair, my kinsman, yea, beautiful, overshadowing our bed.
The beams of our house are cedars, our ceilings are of cypress.
Blessed is the man who has not walked in the counsel of the ungodly, and has not stood in the way of sinners, and has not sat in the seat of evil men.
But his pleasure is in the law of the Lord; and in his law will he meditate day and night.
And he shall be as a tree planted by the brooks of waters, which shall yield its fruit in its season, and its leaf shall not fall off; and whatsoever he shall do shall be prospered.
Not so the ungodly; not so: but rather as the chaff which the wind scatters away from the face of the earth.
Therefore the ungodly shall not rise in judgment, nor sinners in the counsel of the just.
For the Lord knows the way of the righteous; but the way of the ungodly shall perish.
in the tabernacle of the testimony, without the veil that is before the ark of the covenant, shall Aaron and his sons burn it from evening until morning, before the Lord: it is a perpetual ordinance throughout your generations of the children of Israel.
But Job answered and said,
Oh that one would indeed weigh the wrath that is upon me, and take up my griefs in a balance together!
And verily they would be heavier than the sand by the seashore: but, as it seems, my words are vain.
For the arrows of the Lord are in my body, whose violence drinks up my blood: whenever I am going to speak, they pierce me.
What then? will the wild ass bray for nothing, if he is not seeking food? or again, will the ox low at the manger, when he has a fodder?
Shall bread be eaten without salt? or again, is there taste in empty words?
For my wrath cannot cease; for I perceive my food as the smell of a lion to be loathsome.
For oh that he would grant my desire, and my petition might come, and the Lord would grant my hope!
Let the grave be my city, upon the walls of which I have leaped: I will not shrink from it; for I have not denied the holy words of my God.
For what is my strength, that I continue? what is my time, that my soul endures?
Is my strength the strength of stones? or is my flesh of brass?
Or have I not trusted in him? but help is far from me.
Mercy has rejected me; and the visitation of the Lord has disregarded me.
My nearest relations have not regarded me; they have passed me by like a failing brook, or like a wave.
They who used to reverence me, now have come against me like snow or congealed ice.
When it has melted at the approach of heat, it is not known what it was.
Thus I also have been deserted of all; and I am ruined, and become an outcast.
Behold the ways of the Thaemanites, ye that mark the paths of the Sabaeans.
They too that trust in cities and riches shall come to shame.
But ye also have come to me without pity; so that beholding my wound ye are afraid.
What? have I made any demand of you? or do I ask for strength from you,
to deliver me from enemies, or to rescue me from the hand of the mighty ones?
Teach ye me, and I will be silent: if in anything I have erred, tell me.
But as it seems, the words of a true man are vain, because I do not ask strength of you.
Neither will your reproof cause me to cease my words, for neither will I endure the sound of your speech.
Even because ye attack the fatherless, and insult your friend.
But now, having looked upon your countenances, I will not lie.
Sit down now, and let there not be unrighteousness; and unite again with the just.
For there is no injustice in my tongue; and does not my throat meditate understanding?
And it came to pass in those days that the Philistines gathered themselves together against Israel to war; and Israel went out to meet them and encamped at Abenezer, and the Philistines encamped in Aphec.
And the Philistines prepare to fight with Israel, and the battle was turned against them; and the men of Israel fell before the Philistines, and there were smitten in the battle in the field four thousand men.
And the people came to the camp, and the elders of Israel said, Why has the Lord caused us to fall this day before the Philistines? let us take the ark of our God out of Selom, and let it proceed from the midst of us, and it shall save us from the hand of our enemies.
And the people sent to Selom, and they take thence the ark of the Lord who dwells between the cherubs: and both the sons of Heli, Ophni and Phinees, were with the ark.
And it came to pass when the ark of the Lord entered into the camp, that all Israel cried out with a loud voice, and the earth resounded.
And the Philistines heard the cry, and the Philistines said, What is this great cry in the camp of the Hebrews: and they understood that the ark of the Lord was come into the camp.
And the Philistines feared, and said, These are the Gods that are come to them into the camp.
Woe to us, O Lord, deliver us to-day for such a thing has not happened aforetime: woe to us, who shall deliver us out of the hand of these mighty Gods? these are the Gods that smote Egypt with every plague, and in the wilderness.
Strengthen yourselves and behave yourselves like men, O ye Philistines, that ye may not serve the Hebrews as they have served us, but be ye men and fight with them.
And they fought with them; and the men of Israel fall, and they fled every man to his ten; and there was a very great slaughter; and there fell of Israel thirty thousand fighting men.
And the ark of God was taken, and both the sons of Heli, Ophni, and Phinees, died.
And there ran a man of Benjamin out of the battle, and he came to Selom on that day: and his clothes were rent, and earth was upon his head.
And he came, an behold, Heli was upon the seat by the gate looking along the way, for his heart was greatly alarmed for the ark of God: and the man entered into the city to bring tidings; and the city cried out.
And Heli heard the sound of the cry, and said, What is the voice of this cry? and the men hasted and went in, and reported to Heli.
Now Heli was ninety years old, and his eyes were fixed, and he saw not.
And Heli said to them that stood round about him, What is the voice of this sound? And the man hasted and advanced to Heli, and said to him, I am he that is come out of the camp, and I have fled from the battle to-day: and Heli said, What is the even, my son?
And they young man answered and said, The men of Israel fled from the face of the Philistines, and there was a great slaughter among the people, and both thy sons are dead, and the ark of God is taken.
And it came to pass, when he mentioned the ark of God, that he fell from the seat backward near the gate, and his back was broken, and he died, for he was an old man and heavy: and he judged Israel twenty years.
And his daughter-in-law the wife of Phinees was with child, about to bring forth; and she heard the tidings, that the ark of God was taken, and that her father-in-law and her husband were dead; and she wept and was delivered, for her pains came upon her.
And in her time she was at the point of death; and the women that stood by her, said to her, Fear not, for thou hast born a son: but she answered not, and her heart did not regard it.
And she called the child Uaebarchaboth, because of the ark of God, and because of her father-in-law, and because of her husband.
And they said, The glory of Israel is departed, forasmuch as the ark of the Lord is taken.
I will exalt thee, my God, my king; and I will bless thy name for ever and ever.
Every day will I bless thee, and I will praise thy name for ever and ever.
The Lord is great, and greatly to be praised; and there is no end to his greatness.
Generation after generation shall praise thy works, and tell of thy power.
And they shall speak of the glorious majesty of thy holiness, and recount thy wonders.
And they shall speak of the power of thy terrible acts; and recount thy greatness.
They shall utter the memory of the abundance of thy goodness, and shall exult in thy righteousness.
The Lord is compassionate, and merciful; long suffering, and abundant in mercy.
The Lord is good to those that wait on him; and his compassions are over all his works.
Let all thy works, O Lord, give thanks to thee; and let thy saints bless thee.
They shall speak of the glory of thy kingdom, and talk of thy dominion;
to make known to the sons of men thy power, and the glorious majesty of thy kingdom.
Thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and thy dominion endures through all generations. The Lord is faithful in his words, and holy in all his works.
The Lord supports all that are falling, and sets up all that are broken down.
The eyes of all wait upon thee; and thou givest them their food in due season.
Thou openest thine hands, and fillest every living thing with pleasure.
The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works.
The Lord is near to all that call upon him, to all that call upon him in truth.
He will perform the desire of them that fear him: and he will hear their supplication, and save them.
The Lord preserves all that love him: but all sinners he will utterly destroy.
My mouth shall speak the praise of the Lord: and let all flesh bless his holy name for ever and ever.
And these the generations of Isaac the son of Abraam.
Abraam begot Isaac. And Isaac was forty years old when he took to wife Rebecca, daughter of Bathuel the Syrian, out of Syrian Mesopotamia, sister of Laban the Syrian.
And Isaac prayed the Lord concerning Rebecca his wife, because she was barren; and the Lord heard him, and his wife Rebecca conceived in her womb.
And Esau said to Jacob, Let me taste of that red pottage, because I am fainting; therefore his name was called Edom.
And Jacob said to Esau, Sell me this day thy birthright.
And Esau said, Behold, I am going to die, and for what good does this birthright to me?
And Moses sent them to spy out the land of Chanaan, and said to them, Go up by this wilderness; and ye shall go up to the mountain,
and ye shall see the land, what it is, and the people that dwells on it, whether it is strong or weak, or whether they are few or many.
And what the land is on which they dwell, whether it is good or bad; and what the cities are wherein these dwell, whether they dwell in walled cities or unwalled.
And what the land is, whether rich or poor; whether there are trees in it or no: and ye shall persevere and take of the fruits of the land: and the days were the days of spring, the forerunners of the grape.
And they went up and surveyed the land from the wilderness of Sin to Rhoob, as men go in to Aemath.
And they went up by the wilderness, and departed as far as Chebron; and there was Achiman, and Sessi, and Thelami, the progeny of Enach. Now Chebron was built seven years before Tanin of Egypt.
And they came to the valley of the cluster and surveyed it; and they cut down thence a bough and one cluster of grapes upon it, and bore it on staves, and they took of the pomegranates and the figs.
And they called that place, The valley of the cluster, because of the cluster which the children of Israel cut down from thence.
And they returned from thence, having surveyed the land, after forty days.
And they proceeded and came to Moses and Aaron and all the congregation of the children of Israel, to the wilderness of Pharan Cades; and they brought word to them and to all the congregation, and they shewed the fruit of the land:
and they reported to him, and said, We came into the land into which thou sentest us, a land flowing with milk and honey; and this is the fruit of it.
Only the nation that dwells upon it is bold, and they have very great and strong walled towns, and we saw there the children of Enach.
And Amalec dwells in the land toward the south: and the Chettite and the Evite, and the Jebusite, and the Amorite dwells in the hill country: and the Chananite dwells by the sea, and by the river Jordan.
And Chaleb stayed the people from speaking before Moses, and said to him, Nay, but we will go up by all means, and will inherit it, for we shall surely prevail against them.
But the men that went up together with him said, We will not go up, for we shall not by any means be able to go up against the nation, for it is much stronger than we.
And it came to pass when the time o the year for kings going out to battle had come round, that David sent Joab, and his servants with him, and all Israel; and they destroyed the children of Ammon, and besieged Rabbath: but David remained at Jerusalem.
And it came to pass toward evening, that David arose off his couch, and walked on the roof of the king's house, and saw from the roof a woman bathing; and the woman was very beautiful to look upon.
And David sent and enquired about the woman: and one said, Is not this Bersabee the daughter of Eliab, the wife of Urias the Chettite?
And David sent messengers, and took her, and went in to her, and he lay with her: and she was purified from her uncleanness, and returned to her house.
And the woman conceived; and she sent and told David, and said, I am with child.
And David sent to Joab, saying, Send me Urias the Chettite; and Joab sent Urias to David.
And Urias arrived and went in to him, and David asked him how Joab was, and how the people were, and how the war went on.
And David said to Urias, Go to thy house, and wash thy feet: and Urias departed from the house of the king, and a portion of meat from the king followed him.
And Urias slept at the door of the king with the servants of his lord, and went not down to his house.
And they brought David word, saying, Urias has not gone down to his house. And David said to Urias, Art thou not come from a journey? why hast thou not gone down to thy house?
And Urias said to David, The ark, and Israel, and Juda dwell in tents; and my lord Joab, and the servants of my lord, are encamped in the open fields; and shall I go into my house to eat and drink, and lie with my wife? how should I do this? as thy soul lives, I will not do this thing.
And David said to Urias, Remain here to-day also, and to-morrow I will let thee go. So Urias remained in Jerusalem that day and the day following.
And David called him, and he ate before him and drank, and he made him drunk: and he went out in the evening to lie upon his bed with the servants of his lord, and went not down to his house.
And the morning came, and David wrote a letter to Joab, and sent it by the hand of Urias.
And he wrote in the letter, saying, Station Urias in front of the severe part of the fight, and retreat from behind him, so shall he be wounded and die.
And it came to pass while Joab was watching against the city, that he set Urias in a place where he knew that valiant men were.
And the men of the city went out, and fought with Joab: and some of the people of the servants of David fell, and Urias the Chettite died also.
And Joab sent, and reported to David all the events of the war, so as to tell them to the king.
And he charged the messenger, saying, When thou hast finished reporting all the events of the war to the king,
then it shall come to pass if the anger of the king shall arise, and he shall say to thee, Why did ye draw nigh to the city to fight? knew ye not that they would shoot from off the wall?
Who smote Abimelech the son of Jerobaal son of Ner? did not a woman cast a piece of a millstone upon him from above the wall, and he died in Thamasi? why did ye draw near to the wall? then thou shalt say, Thy servant Urias the Chettite is also dead.
And the messenger of Joab went to the king to Jerusalem, and he came and reported to David all that Joab told him, all the affairs of the war. And David was very angry with Joab, and said to the messenger, Why did ye draw nigh to the wall to fight? knew ye not that ye would be wounded from off the wall? Who smote Abimelech the son of Jerobaal? did not a woman cast upon him a piece of millstone from the wall, and he died in Thamasi? why did ye draw near to the wall?
And the messenger said to David, The men prevailed against us, and they came out against us into the field, and we came upon them even to the door of the gate.
And the archers shot at thy servants from off the wall, and some of the king's servants died, and thy servant Urias the Chettite is dead also.
And David said to the messenger, Thus shalt thou say to Joab, Let not the matter be grievous in thine eyes, for the sword devours one way at one time and another way at another: strengthen thine array against the city, and destroy it, and strengthen him.
And the wife of Urias heard that Urias her husband was dead, and she mourned for her husband.
And the time of mourning expired, and David sent and took her into his house, and she became his wife, and bore him a son: but the thing which David did was evil in the eyes of the Lord.
And it came to pass after a time, in the days of wheat harvest, that Sampson visited his wife with a kid, and said, I will go in to my wife even into the chamber: but her father did not suffer him to go in.
And her father spoke, saying, I said that thou didst surely hate her, and I gave her to one of thy friends: is not her younger sister better than she? let her be to thee instead of her.
And Sampson said to them, Even for once am I guiltless with regard to the Philistines, in that I do mischief among them.
And Sampson went and caught three hundred foxes, and took torches, and turned tail to tail, and put a torch between two tails, and fastened it.
And he set fire to the torches, and sent the foxes into the corn of the Philistines; and every thing was burnt from the threshing floor to the standing corn, and even to the vineyard and olives.
And the Philistines said, Who has done these things? and they said, Sampson the son-in-law of the Thamnite, because he has taken his wife, and given her to one of his friends; and the Philistines went up, and burnt her and her father's house with fire.
And Sampson said to them, Though ye may have dealt thus with her, verily I will be avenged of you, and afterwards I will cease.
And he smote them leg on thigh with a great overthrow; and went down and dwelt in a cave of the rock Etam.
And the Philistines went up, and encamped in Juda, and spread themselves abroad in Lechi.
And the men of Juda said, Why are ye come up against us? and the Philistines said, We are come up to bind Sampson, and to do to him as he has done to us.
And the three thousand men of Juda went down to the hole of the rock Etam, and they said to Sampson, Knowest thou not that the Philistines rule over us? and what is this that thou hast done to us? and Sampson said to them, As they did to me, so have I done to them.
And they said to him, We are come down to bind thee to deliver thee into the hand of the Philistines: and Sampson said to them, Swear to me that ye will not fall upon me yourselves.
And they spoke to him, saying, Nay, but we will only bind thee fast, and deliver thee into their hand, and will by no means slay thee: and they bound him with two new ropes, and brought him from that rock.
And they came to Lechi: and the Philistines shouted, and ran to meet him: and the Spirit of the Lord came mightily upon him, and the ropes that were upon his arms became as tow which is burnt with fire; and his bonds were consumed from off his hands.
And he found the jaw-bone of an ass that had been cast away, and he put forth his hand and took it, and smote with it a thousand men.
And Sampson said, With the jaw-bone of an ass I have utterly destroyed them, for with the jaw-bone of an ass I have smitten a thousand men.
And it came to pass when he ceased speaking, that he cast the jaw-bone out of his hand; and he called that place the Lifting of the jaw-bone.
And he was very thirsty, and wept before the Lord, and said, Thou hast been well pleased to grant this great deliverance by the hand of thy servant, and new shall I die for thirst, and fall into the hand of the uncircumcised?
And God broke open a hollow place in the jaw, and there came thence water, and he drank; and his spirit returned and he revived: therefore the name of the fountain was called 'The well of the invoker,' which is in Lechi, until this day.
And he judged Israel in the days of the Philistines twenty years.
And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying,
Take Aaron and his sons, and his robes and the anointing oil, and the calf for the sin-offering, and the two rams, and the basket of unleavened bread,
and assemble the whole congregation at the door of the tabernacle of witness.
And Moses did as the Lord appointed him, and he assembled the congregation at the door of the tabernacle of witness.
And Moses said to the congregation, This is the thing which the Lord has commanded you to do.
And Moses brought nigh Aaron and his sons, and washed them with water,
and put on him the coat, and girded him with the girdle, and clothed him with the tunic, and put on him the ephod;
and girded him with a girdle according to the make of the ephod, and clasped him closely with it: and put upon it the oracle, and put upon the oracle the Manifestation and the Truth.
And he put the mitre on his head, and put upon the mitre in front the golden plate, the most holy thing, as the Lord commanded Moses.
And Moses took of the anointing oil,
and sprinkled of it seven times on the altar; and anointed the altar, and hallowed it, and all things on it, and the laver, and its foot, and sanctified them; and anointed the tabernacle and all its furniture, and hallowed it.
And Moses poured of the anointing oil on the head of Aaron; and he anointed him and sanctified him.
And Moses brought the sons of Aaron near, and put on them coast and girded them with girdles, and put on them bonnets, as the Lord commanded Moses.
And Moses brought near the calf for the sin-offering, and Aaron and his sons laid their hands on the head of the calf of the sin-offering.
And he slew it; and Moses took of the blood, and put it on the horns of the altar round about with his finger; and he purified the altar, and poured out the blood at the bottom of the altar, and sanctified it, to make atonement upon it.
And Moses took all the fat that was upon the inwards, and the lobe on the liver, and both the kidneys, and the fat that was upon them, and Moses offered them on the altar.
But the calf, and his hide, and his flesh, and his dung, he burnt with fire without the camp, as the Lord commanded Moses.
And Moses brought near the ram for a whole-burnt-offering, and Aaron and his sons laid their hands on the head of the ram. And Moses slew the ram: and Moses poured the blood on the altar round about.
And he divided the ram by its limbs, and Moses offered the head, and the limbs, and the fat; and he washed the belly and the feet with water.
And Moses offered up the whole ram on the altar: it is a whole-burnt-offering for a sweet-smelling savour; it is a burnt-offering to the Lord, as the Lord commanded Moses.
And Moses brought the second ram, the ram of consecration, and Aaron and his sons laid their hands on the head of the ram, and he slew him;
and Moses took of his blood, and put it upon the tip of Aaron's right ear, and on the thumb of his right hand, and on the great toe of his right foot.
And Moses brought near the sons of Aaron; and Moses put of the blood on the tips of their right ears, and on the thumbs of their right hands, and on the great toes of their right feet, and Moses poured out the blood on the altar round about.
And he took the fat, and the rump, and the fat on the belly, and the lobe of the liver, and the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, and the right shoulder.
And from the basket of consecration, which was before the Lord, he also took one unleavened loaf, and one loaf made with oil, and one cake; and put them upon the fat, and the right shoulder:
and put them all on the hands of Aaron, and upon the hands of his sons, and offered them up for a wave-offering before the Lord.
And Moses took them at their hands, and Moses offered them on the altar, on the whole-burnt-offering of consecration, which is a smell of sweet savour: it is a burnt-offering to the Lord.
And Moses took the breast, and separated it for a heave-offering before the Lord, from the ram of consecration; and it became Moses' portion, as the Lord commanded Moses.
And Moses took of the anointing oil, and of the blood that was on the altar, and sprinkled it on Aaron, and on his garments, and his sons, and the garments of his sons with him.
And he sanctified Aaron and his garments, and his sons, and the garments of his sons with him.
And Moses said to Aaron and to his sons, Boil the flesh in the tent of the tabernacle of witness in the holy place; and there ye shall eat it and the loaves in the basket of consecration, as it has been appointed me, the Lord saying, Aaron and his sons shall eat them.
And that which is left of the flesh and of the loaves burn ye with fire.
And ye shall not go out from the door of the tabernacle of witness for seven days, until the day be fulfilled, the day of your consecration; for in seven days shall he consecrate you,
as he did in this day on which the Lord commanded me to do so, to make an atonement for you.
And ye shall remain seven days at the door of the tabernacle of witness, day and night; ye shall observe the ordinances of the Lord, that ye die not; for so has the Lord God commanded me.
And Aaron and his sons performed all these commands which the Lord commanded Moses.
Make a joyful noise to the Lord, all the earth.
Serve the Lord with gladness; come before his presence with exultation.
Know that the Lord he is God; he made us, and not we ourselves; we are his people, and the sheep of his pasture.
Enter into his gates with thanksgiving, and his courts with hymns; give thanks to him, praise his name.
For the Lord is good, his mercy is for ever; and his truth endures to generation and generation.
Behold now, bless ye the Lord, all the servants of the Lord, who stand in the house of the Lord, in the courts of the house of our God.
Lift up your hands by night in the sanctuaries, and bless the Lord.
May the Lord, who made heaven and earth, bless thee out of Sion.
And it came to pass in the year in which king Ozias died, that I saw the Lord sitting on a high and exalted throne, and the house was full of his glory.
And seraphs stood round about him: each one had six wings: and with two they covered their face, and with two they covered their feet, and with two they flew.
And one cried to the other, and they said, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts: the whole earth is full of his glory.
And the lintel shook at the voice they uttered, and the house was filled with smoke.
And I said, Woe is me, for I am pricked to the heart; for being a man, and having unclean lips, I dwell in the midst of a people having unclean lips; and I have seen with mine eyes the King, the Lord of hosts.
And there was sent to me one of the seraphs, and he had in his hand a coal, which he had taken off the altar with the tongs:
and he touched my mouth, and said, Behold, this has touched thy lips, and will take away thine iniquities, and will purge off thy sins.
And I heard the voice of the Lord, saying, Whom shall I send, and who will go to this people? And I said, behold, I am here, send me. And he said, Go, and say to this people,
Ye shall hear indeed, but ye shall not understand; and ye shall see indeed, but ye shall not perceive.
For the heart of this people has become gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes have they closed; lest they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and be converted, and I should heal them.
And I said, How long, O Lord? And he said, Until cities be deserted by reason of their not being inhabited, and the houses by reason of there being no men, and the land shall be left desolate.
And after this God shall remove the men far off, and they that are left upon the land shall be multiplied.
And yet there shall be a tenth upon it, and again it shall be for a spoil, as a turpentine tree, and as an acorn when it falls out of its husk.
For the great day of the Lord is near, it is near, and very speedy; the sound of the day of the Lord is made bitter and harsh.
A mighty day of wrath is that day, a day of affliction and distress, a day of desolation and destruction, a day of gloominess and darkness, a day of cloud and vapour,
a day of the trumpet and cry against the strong cities, and against the high towers.
And I will greatly afflict the men, and they shall walk as blind men, because they have sinned against the Lord; therefore he shall pour out their blood as dust, and their flesh as dung.
And their silver and their gold shall in nowise be able to rescue them in the day of the Lord's wrath; but the whole land shall be devoured by the fire of his jealously; for he will bring a speedy destruction on all them that inhabit the land.
I cried to the Lord with my voice, yea, my voice was addressed to God; and he gave heed to me.
In the day of mine affliction I earnestly sought the Lord; even with my hands by night before him, and I was not deceived; my soul refused to be comforted.
I remembered God, and rejoiced; I poured out my complaint, and my soul fainted. Pause.
All mine enemies set a watch against me: I was troubled, and spoke not.
I considered the days of old, and remembered ancient years.
And I meditated; I communed with my heart by night, and diligently searched my spirit, saying,
Will the Lord cast off for ever? and will he be well pleased no more?
Will he cut off his mercy for ever, even for ever and ever?
Will God forget to pity? or will he shut up his compassions in his wrath? Pause.
And I said, Now I have begun; this is the change of the right hand of the Most High.
I remembered the works of the Lord; for I will remember thy wonders from the beginning.
And I will meditate on all thy works, and will consider thy doings.
O God, thy way is in the sanctuary; who is a great God as our God?
Thou art the God that doest wonders; thou hast made known thy power among the nations.
Thou hast with thine arm redeemed thy people, the sons of Jacob and Joseph. Pause.
The waters saw thee, O God, the waters saw thee, and feared; and the depths were troubled.
There was an abundant sound of waters: the clouds uttered a voice; for thine arrows went abroad.
The voice of thy thunder was abroad, and around thy lightnings appeared to the world; the earth trembled a quaked.
Thy way is in the sea, and thy paths in many waters, and thy footsteps cannot be known.
Thou didst guide thy people as sheep by the hand of Moses and Aaron.
What advantage has a man? for who knows what is good for a man in his life, during the number of the life of the days of his vanity? and he has spent them as a shadow; for who shall tell a man what shall be after him under the sun?
A good name is better than good oil; and the day of death than the day of birth.
It is better to go to the house of mourning, than to go to the banquet house: since this is the end of every man; and the living man will apply good warning to his heart.
Sorrow is better than laughter: for by the sadness of the countenance the heart will be made better.
The heart of the wise is in the house of mourning; but the heart of fools is in the house of mirth.
It is better to hear a reproof of a wise man, than for a man to hear the song of fools.
As the sound of thorns under a caldron, so is the laughter of fools: this is also vanity.
for oppression makes a wise man mad, and destroys his noble heart.
The end of a matter is better than the beginning thereof: the patient is better than the high-minded.
Be not hasty in thy spirit to be angry: for anger will rest in the bosom of fools.
Say not, What has happened, that the former days were better than these? for thou dost not enquire in wisdom concerning this.
Wisdom is good with an inheritance: and there is an advantage by it to them that see the sun.
For wisdom in its shadow is as the shadow of silver: and the excellence of the knowledge of wisdom will give life to him that has it.
Behold the works of God: for who shall be able to straighten him whom God has made crooked?
In the day of prosperity live joyfully, and consider in the day of adversity: consider, I say, God also has caused the one to agree with the other for this reason, that man should find nothing after him.
I have seen all things in the days of my vanity: there is a just man perishing in his justice, and there is an ungodly man remaining in his wickedness.
Be not very just; neither be very wise: lest thou be confounded.
Be not very wicked; and be not stubborn: lest thou shouldest die before thy time.
It is well for thee to hold fast by this; also by this defile not thine hand: for to them that fear God all things shall come forth well.
Wisdom will help the wise man more than ten mighty men which are in the city.
For there is not a righteous man in the earth, who will do good, and not sin
Also take no heed to all the words which ungodly men shall speak; lest thou hear thy servant cursing thee.
For many times he shall trespass against thee, and repeatedly shall he afflict thine heart; for thus also hast thou cursed others.
All these things have I proved in wisdom: I said, I will be wise; but it was far from me.
That which is far beyond what was, and a great depth, who shall find it out?
I and my heart went round about to know, and to examine, and to seek wisdom, and the account of things, and to know the folly and trouble and madness of the ungodly man.
And I find her to be, and I will pronounce to be more bitter than death the woman which is a snare, and her heart nets, who has a band in her hands: he that is good in the sight of God shall be delivered from her; but the sinner shall be caught by her.
Behold, this have I found, said the Preacher, seeking by one at a time to find out the account,
which my soul sought after, but I found not: for I have found one man of a thousand; but a woman in all these I have not found.
But, behold, this have I found, that God made man upright; but they have sought out many devices.
And these are the stages of the children of Israel, as they went out from the land of Egypt with their host by the hand of Moses and Aaron.
And Moses wrote their removals and their stages, by the word of the Lord: and these are the stages of their journeying.
They departed from Ramesses in the first month, on the fifteenth day of the first month; on the day after the passover the children of Israel went forth with a high hand before all the Egyptians.
And the Egyptians buried those that died of them, even all that the Lord smote, every first-born in the land of Egypt; also the Lord executed vengeance on their gods.
And the children of Israel departed from Ramesses, and encamped in Socchoth:
and they departed from Socchoth and encamped in Buthan, which is a part of the wilderness.
And they departed from Buthan and encamped at the mouth of Iroth, which is opposite Beel-sepphon, and encamped opposite Magdol.
And they departed from before Iroth, and crossed the middle of the sea into the wilderness; and they went a journey of three days through the wilderness, and encamped in Picriae.
And they departed from Picriae, and came to Aelim; and in Aelim were twelve fountains of water, and seventy palm-trees, and they encamped there by the water.
And they departed from Aelim, and encamped by the Red Sea.
And they departed from the Red Sea, and encamped in the wilderness of Sin.
And they departed from the wilderness of Sin, and encamped in Raphaca.
And they departed from Raphaca, and encamped in Aelus.
And they departed from Aelus, and encamped in Raphidin; and there was no water there for the people to drink.
And they departed from Raphidin, and encamped in the wilderness of Sina.
And they departed from the wilderness of Sina, and encamped at the Graves of Lust.
And they departed from the Graves of Lust, and encamped in Aseroth.
And they departed from Aseroth, and encamped in Rathama.
And they departed from Rathama, and encamped in Remmon Phares.
And they departed from Remmon Phares, and encamped in Lebona.
And they departed from Lebona, and encamped in Ressan.
And they departed from Ressan, and encamped in Makellath.
And they departed from Makellath, and encamped in Saphar.
And they departed from Saphar, and encamped in Charadath.
And they departed from Charadath, and encamped in Makeloth.
And they departed from Makeloth, and encamped in Kataath.
And they departed from Kataath, and encamped in Tarath.
And they departed from Tarath, and encamped in Mathecca.
And they departed from Mathecca, and encamped in Selmona.
And they departed from Selmona, and encamped in Masuruth.
And they departed from Masuruth, and encamped in Banaea.
And they departed from Banaea, and encamped in the mountain Gadgad.
And they departed from the mountain Gadgad, and encamped in Etebatha.
And they departed from Etebatha, and encamped in Ebrona.
And they departed from Ebrona, and encamped in Gesion Gaber.
And they departed from Gesion Gaber, and encamped in the wilderness of Sin; and they departed from the wilderness of Sin, and encamped in the wilderness of Pharan; this is Cades.
And they departed from Cades, and encamped in mount Or near the land of Edom.
And Aaron the priest went up by the command of the Lord, and died there in the fortieth year of the departure of the children of Israel from the land of Egypt, in the fifth month, on the first day of the month.
And Aaron was a hundred and twenty-three years old, when he died in mount Or.
And Arad the Chananitish king (he too dwelt in the land of Chanaan) having heard when the children of Israel were entering the land
then they departed from mount Or, and encamped in Selmona.
And they departed from Selmona, and encamped in Phino.
And they departed from Phino, and encamped in Oboth.
And they departed from Oboth, and encamped in Gai, on the other side Jordan on the borders of Moab.
And they departed from Gai, and encamped in Daebon Gad.
And they departed from Daebon Gad, and encamped in Gelmon Deblathaim.
And they departed from Gelmon Deblathaim, and encamped on the mountains of Abarim, over against Nabau.
And they departed from the mountains of Abarim, and encamped on the west of Moab, at Jordan by Jericho.
And they encamped by Jordan between Aesimoth, as far as Belsa to the west of Moab.
And the Lord spoke to Moses at the west of Moab by Jordan at Jericho, saying,
Speak to the children of Israel, and thou shalt say to them, Ye are to pass over Jordan into the land of Chanaan.
And ye shall destroy all that dwell in the land before your face, and ye shall abolish their high places, and all their molten images ye shall destroy, and ye shall demolish all their pillars.
And ye shall destroy all the inhabitants of the land, and ye shall dwell in it, for I have given their land to you for an inheritance.
And ye shall inherit their land according to your tribes; to the greater number ye shall give the larger possession, and to the smaller ye shall give the less possession; to whatsoever part a man's name shall go forth by lot, there shall be his property: ye shall inherit according to the tribes of your families.
But if ye will not destroy the dwellers in the land from before you, then it shall come to pass that whomsoever of them ye shall leave shall be thorns in your eyes, and darts in your sides, and they shall be enemies to you on the land on which ye shall dwell;
and it shall come to pass that as I had determined to do to them, so I will do to you.
So Tobit made an end of praising God.
And he was eight and fifty years old when he lost his sight, which was restored to him after eight years: and he gave alms, and he increased in the fear of the Lord God, and praised him.
And when he was very aged he called his son, and the sons of his son, and said to him, My son, take thy children; for, behold, I am aged, and am ready to depart out of this life.
Go into Media my son, for I surely believe those things which Jonas the prophet spake of Nineve, that it shall be overthrown; and that for a time peace shall rather be in Media; and that our brethren shall lie scattered in the earth from that good land: and Jerusalem shall be desolate, and the house of God in it shall be burned, and shall be desolate for a time;
And that again God will have mercy on them, and bring them again into the land, where they shall build a temple, but not like to the first, until the time of that age be fulfilled; and afterward they shall return from all places of their captivity, and build up Jerusalem gloriously, and the house of God shall be built in it for ever with a glorious building, as the prophets have spoken thereof.
And all nations shall turn, and fear the Lord God truly, and shall bury their idols.
So shall all nations praise the Lord, and his people shall confess God, and the Lord shall exalt his people; and all those which love the Lord God in truth and justice shall rejoice, shewing mercy to our brethren.
And now, my son, depart out of Nineve, because that those things which the prophet Jonas spake shall surely come to pass.
But keep thou the law and the commandments, and shew thyself merciful and just, that it may go well with thee.
And bury me decently, and thy mother with me; but tarry no longer at Nineve. Remember, my son, how Aman handled Achiacharus that brought him up, how out of light he brought him into darkness, and how he rewarded him again: yet Achiacharus was saved, but the other had his reward: for he went down into darkness. Manasses gave alms, and escaped the snares of death which they had set for him: but Aman fell into the snare, and perished.
Wherefore now, my son, consider what alms doeth, and how righteousness doth deliver. When he had said these things, he gave up the ghost in the bed, being an hundred and eight and fifty years old; and he buried him honourably.
And when Anna his mother was dead, he buried her with his father. But Tobias departed with his wife and children to Ecbatane to Raguel his father in law,
Where he became old with honour, and he buried his father and mother in law honourably, and he inherited their substance, and his father Tobit's.
And he died at Ecbatane in Media, being an hundred and seven and twenty years old.
But before he died he heard of the destruction of Nineve, which was taken by Nabuchodonosor and Assuerus: and before his death he rejoiced over Nineve.
Hearken to me, ye that follow after righteousness, and seek the Lord: look to the solid rock, which ye have hewn, and to the hole of the pit which ye have dug.
Look to Abraam your father, and to Sarrha that bore you: for he was alone when I called him, and blessed him, and loved him, and multiplied him.
And now I will comfort thee, O Sion: and I have comforted all her desert places; and I will make her desert places as a garden, and her western places as the garden of the Lord; they shall find in her gladness and exultation, thanksgiving and the voice of praise.
Hear me, hear me, my people; and ye kings, hearken to me: for a law shall proceed from me, and my judgment shall be for a light of the nations.
My righteousness speedily draws nigh, and my salvation shall go forth as light, and on mine arm shall the Gentiles trust: the isles shall wait for me, and on mine arm shall they trust.
Lift up your eyes to the sky, and look on the earth beneath: for the sky was darkened like smoke, and the earth shall wax old like a garment, and the inhabitants shall die in like manner: but my righteousness shall not fail.
Hear me, ye that know judgment, the people in whose heart is my law: fear not the reproach of men, and be not overcome by their contempt.
For as a garment will be devoured by time, and as wool will be devoured by a moth, so shall they be consumed; but my righteousness shall be for ever, and my salvation for all generations.
Awake, awake, O Jerusalem, and put on the strength of thine arm; awake as in the early time, as the ancient generation.
Art thou not it that dried the sea, the water, even the abundance of the deep; that made the depths of the sea a way of passage for the delivered and redeemed?
for by the help of the Lord they shall return, and come to Sion with joy and everlasting exultation, for praise and joy shall come upon their head: pain, and grief, and groaning, have fled away.
I, even I, am he that comforts thee: consider who thou art, that thou wast afraid of mortal man, and of the son of man, who are withered as grass.
And thou hast forgotten God who made thee, who made the sky and founded the earth; and thou wert continually afraid because of the wrath of him that afflicted thee: for whereas he counselled to take thee away, yet now where is the wrath of him that afflicted thee?
For in thy deliverance he shall not halt, nor tarry;
for I am thy God, that troubles the sea, and causes the waves thereof to roar: the Lord of hosts is my name.
I will put my words into thy mouth, and I will shelter thee under the shadow of mine hand, with which I fixed the sky, and founded the earth: and the Lord shall say to Sion, Thou art my people.
Awake, awake, stand up, O Jerusalem, that hast drunk at the hand of the Lord the cup of his fury: for thou hast drunk out and drained the cup of calamity, the cup of wrath:
and there was none to comfort thee of all the children whom thou borest; and there was none to take hold of thine hand, not even of all the children whom thou has reared.
Wherefore these things are against thee; who shall sympathize with thee in thy grief? downfall, and destruction, famine, and sword: who shall comfort thee?
Thy sons are the perplexed ones, that sleep at the top of every street as a half-boiled beet; they that are full of the anger of the Lord, caused to faint by the Lord God.
Therefore hear, thou afflicted one, and drunken, but not with wine;
thus saith the Lord God that judges his people, Behold, I have taken out of thine hand the cup of calamity, the cup of my wrath; and thou shalt not drink it any more.
And I will give it into the hands of them that injured thee, and them that afflicted thee; who said to thy soul, Bow down, that we may pass over: and thou didst level thy body with the ground to them passing by without.
O God, my God, attend to me: why hast thou forsaken me? the account of my transgressions is far from my salvation.
O my God, I will cry to thee by day, but thou wilt not hear: and by night, and it shall not be accounted for folly to me.
But thou, the praise of Israel, dwellest in a sanctuary.
Our fathers hoped in thee; they hoped, and thou didst deliver them.
They cried to thee, and were saved: they hoped in thee, and were not ashamed.
But I am a worm, and not a man; a reproach of men, and scorn of the people.
All that saw me mocked me: they spoke with their lips, they shook the head, saying,
He hoped in the Lord: let him deliver him, let him save him, because he takes pleasure in him.
For thou art he that drew me out of the womb; my hope from my mother's breasts.
I was cast on thee from the womb: thou art my God from my mother's belly.
Stand not aloof from me; for affliction is near; for there is no helper.
Many bullocks have compassed me: fat bulls have beset me round.
They have opened their mouth against me, as a ravening and roaring lion.
I am poured out like water, and all my bones are loosened: my heart in the midst of my belly is become like melting wax.
My strength is dried up, like a potsherd; and my tongue is glued to my throat; and thou hast brought me down to the dust of death.
For many dogs have compassed me: the assembly of the wicked doers has beset me round: they pierced my hands and my feet.
They counted all my bones; and they observed and looked upon me.
They parted my garments among themselves, and cast lots upon my raiment.
But thou, O Lord, remove not my help afar off: be ready for mine aid.
Deliver my soul from the sword; my only-begotten one from the power of the dog.
Save me from the lion's mouth; and regard my lowliness from the horns of the unicorns.
I will declare thy name to my brethren: in the midst of the church will I sing praise to thee.
Ye that fear the Lord, praise him; all ye seed of Jacob, glorify him: let all the seed of Israel fear him.
For he has not despised nor been angry at the supplication of the poor; nor turned away his face from me; but when I cried to him, he heard me.
My praise is of thee in the great congregation: I will pay my vows before them that fear him.
The poor shall eat and be satisfied; and they shall praise the Lord that seek him: their heart shall live for ever.
All the ends of the earth shall remember and turn to the Lord: and all the kindreds of the nations shall worship before him.
For the kingdom is the Lord's; and he is the governor of the nations.
All the fat ones of the earth have eaten and worshipped: all that go down to the earth shall fall down before him: my soul also lives to him.
And my seed shall serve him: the generation that is coming shall be reported to the Lord.
And they shall report his righteousness to the people that shall be born, whom the Lord has made.
And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Behold, I have made thee a god to Pharao, and Aaron thy brother shall be thy prophet.
And thou shalt say to him all things that I charge thee, and Aaron thy brother shall speak to Pharao, that he should send forth the children of Israel out of his land.
And I will harden the heart of Pharao, and I will multiply my signs and wonders in the land of Egypt.
And Pharao will not hearken to you, and I will lay my hand upon Egypt; and will bring out my people the children of Israel with my power out of the land of Egypt with great vengeance.
And all the Egyptians shall know that I am the Lord, stretching out my hand upon Egypt, and I will bring out the children of Israel out of the midst of them.
And Moses and Aaron did as the Lord commanded them, so did they.
And Moses was eighty years old, and Aaron his brother was eighty-three years old, when he spoke to Pharao.
And the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying,
Now if Pharao should speak to you, saying, Give us a sign or a wonder, then shalt thou say to thy brother Aaron, Take thy rod and cast it upon the ground before Pharao, and before his servants, and it shall become a serpent.
And Moses and Aaron went in before Pharao, and before his servants, and they did so, as the Lord commanded them; and Aaron cast down his rod before Pharao, and before his servants, and it became a serpent.
But Pharao called together the wise men of Egypt, and the sorcerers, and the charmers also of the Egyptians did likewise with their sorceries.
And they cast down each his rod, and they became serpents, but the rod of Aaron swallowed up their rods.
and the heart of Pharao was hardened, and he hearkened not to them, as the Lord charged them.
and the Lord said to Moses, The heart of Pharao is made hard, so that he should not let the people go.
Go to Pharao early in the morning: behold, he goes forth to the water; and thou shalt meet him on the bank of the river, and thou shalt take in thine hand the rod that was turned into a serpent.
And thou shalt say to him, The Lord God of the Hebrews has sent me to thee, saying, Send my people away, that they may serve me in the wilderness, and, behold, hitherto thou hast not hearkened.
These things saith the Lord: Hereby shalt thou know that I am the Lord: behold, I strike with the rod that is in my hand on the water which is in the river, and it shall change it into blood.
And the fish that are in the river shall die, and the river shall stink thereupon, and the Egyptians shall not be able to drink water from the river.
And the Lord said to Moses, Say to thy brother Aaron, Take thy rod in thy hand, and stretch forth thy hand over the waters of Egypt, and over their rivers, and over their canals, and over their ponds, and over all their standing water, and it shall become blood: and there was blood in all the land of Egypt, both in vessels of wood and of stone.
and Moses and Aaron did so, as the Lord commanded them; and Aaron having lifted up his hand with his rod, smote the water in the river before Pharao, and before his servants, and changed all the water in the river into blood.
And the fish in the river died, and the river stank thereupon; and the Egyptians could not drink water from the river, and the blood was in all the land of Egypt.
And the charmers also of the Egyptians did so with their sorceries; and the heart of Pharao was hardened, and he did not hearken to them, even as the Lord said.
And Pharao turned and entered into his house, nor did he fix his attention even on this thing.
And all the Egyptians dug round about the river, so as to drink water, for they could not drink water from the river.
and seven days were fulfilled after the Lord has smitten the river.
They meditated troubles, and wrought wickedness on their beds, and they put it in execution with the daylight; for they have not lifted up their hands to God.
And they desired fields, and plundered orphans, and oppressed families, and spoiled a man and his house, even a man and his inheritance.
Therefore thus saith the Lord; Behold, I devise evils against this family, out of which ye shall not lift up your necks, neither shall ye walk upright speedily: for the time is evil.
In that day shall a parable be taken up against you, and a plaintive lamentation shall be uttered, saying, We are thoroughly miserable: the portion of my people has been measured out with a line, and there was none to hinder him so as to turn him back; your fields have been divided.
Therefore thou shalt have no one to cast a line for the lot.
Weep not with tears in the assembly of the Lord, neither let any weep for these things; for he shall not remove the reproaches,
who says, The house of Jacob has provoked the Spirit of the Lord; are not these his practices? Are not the Lord's words right with him? and have they not proceeded correctly?
Even beforetime my people withstood him as an enemy against his peace; they have stripped off his skin to remove hope in the conflict of war.
The leaders of my people shall be cast forth from their luxurious houses; they are rejected because of their evil practices; draw ye near to the everlasting mountains.
Arise thou, and depart; for this is not thy rest because of uncleanness: ye have been utterly destroyed;
ye have fled, no one pursuing you: thy spirit has framed falsehood, it has dropped on thee for wine and strong drink. But it shall come to pass, that out of the dropping of this people,
Jacob shall be completely gathered with all his people: I will surely receive the remnant of Israel; I will cause them to return together, as sheep in trouble, as a flock in the midst of their fold: they shall rush forth from among men through the breach made before them:
they have broken through, and passed the gate, and gone out by it: and their king has gone out before them, and the Lord shall lead them.
But Job answered and said,
To whom dost thou attach thyself, or whom art thou going to assist? is it not he that has much strength, and he who has a strong arm?
To whom hast thou given counsel? is it not to him who has all wisdom? whom wilt thou follow? is it not one who has the greatest power?
To whom hast thou uttered words? and whose breath is it that has come forth from thee?
He has calmed the sea with his might, and by his wisdom the whale has been overthrown.
And David rose up from thence, and dwelt in the narrow passes of Engaddi.
And it came to pass when Saul returned from pursuing after the Philistines, that it was reported to him, saying, David is in the wilderness of Engaddi.
And he took with him three thousand men, chosen out of all Israel, and went to seek David and his men in front of Saddaeem.
And he came to the flocks of sheep that were by the way, and there was a cave there; and Saul went in to make preparation, and David and his men were sitting in the inner part of the cave.
And the men of David said to him, Behold, this is the day of which the Lord spoke to thee, that he would deliver thine enemy into thy hands; and thou shalt do to him as it is good in thy sight. So David arose and cut off the skirt of Saul's garment secretly.
And it came to pass after this that David's heart smote him, because he had cut off the skirt of his garment.
And David said to his men, The Lord forbid it me, that I should do this ting to my lord the anointed of the Lord, to lift my hand against him; for he is the anointed of the Lord.
So David persuaded his men by his words, and did not suffer them to arise and slay Saul: and Saul arose and went his way.
And David rose up and went after him out of the cave: and David cried after Saul, saying, My lord, O king! and Saul looked behind him, and David bowed with his face to the ground, and did obeisance to him.
And David said to Saul, Why dost thou hearken to the words of the people, saying, Behold, David seeks thy life?
Behold, thine eyes have seen this day how that the Lord has delivered thee this day into my hands in the cave; and I would not slay thee, but spared thee, and said, I will not lift up my hand against my lord, for he is the Lord's anointed.
And behold, the skirt of thy mantle is in my hand, I cut off the skirt, and did not slay thee: know then and see to-day, there is no evil in my hand, nor impiety, nor rebellion; and I have not sinned against thee, yet thou layest snares for my soul to take it.
The Lord judge between me and thee, and the Lord requite thee on thyself: but my hand shall not be upon thee.
As the old proverb says, Transgression will proceed from the wicked ones: but my hand shall not be upon thee.
And now after whom dost thou come forth, O king of Israel? After whom dost thou pursue? After a dead dog, and after a flea?
The Lord be judge and umpire between me and thee, the Lord look upon and judge my cause, and rescue me out of thy hand.
And it came to pass when David had finished speaking these words to Saul, that Saul said, Is this thy voice, Son David? And Saul lifted up his voice, and wept.
And Saul said to David, Thou art more righteous that I, for thou hast recompensed me good, but I have recompensed thee evil.
And thou hast told me to-day what good thou hast done me, how the Lord shut me up into thy hands to-day, and thou didst not slay me.
And if any one should find his enemy in distress, and should send him forth in a good way, then the Lord will reward him good, as thou has done this day.
And now, behold, I know that thou shalt surely reign, and the kingdom of Israel shall be established in thy hand.
Now then swear to me by the Lord, that thou wilt not destroy my seed after me, that thou wilt not blot out my name from the house of my father.
So David swore to Saul: and Saul departed to his place, and David and his men went up to the strong-hold of Messera.
And Israel sojourned in Sattin, and the people profaned itself by going a-whoring after the daughters of Moab.
And they called them to the sacrifices of their idols; and the people ate of their sacrifices, and worshipped their idols.
And Israel consecrated themselves to Beel-phegor; and the Lord was very angry with Israel.
And the Lord said to Moses, Take all the princes of the people, and make them examples of judgment for the Lord in the face of the sun, and the anger of the Lord shall be turned away from Israel.
And Moses said to the tribes of Israel, Slay ye every one his friend that is consecrated to Beel-phegor.
And, behold, a man of the children of Israel came and brought his brother to a Madianitish woman before Moses, and before all the congregation of the children of Israel; and they were weeping at the door of the tabernacle of witness.
And Phinees the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest, saw it, and rose out of the midst of the congregation, and took a javelin in his hand,
and went in after the Israelitish man into the chamber, and pierced them both through, both the Israelitish man, and the woman through her womb; and the plague was stayed from the children of Israel.
Send forth thy bread upon the face of the water: for thou shalt find it after many days.
Give a portion to seven, and also to eight; for thou knowest not what evil there shall be upon the earth.
If the clouds be filled with rain, they pour it out upon the earth: and if a tree fall southward, or if it fall northward, in the place where the tree shall fall, there it shall be.
He that observes the wind sows not; and he that looks at the clouds will not reap.
Among whom none knows what is the way of the wind: as the bones are hid in the womb of a pregnant woman, so thou shalt not know the works of God, even all things whatsoever he shall do.
In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening let not thine hand be slack: for thou knowest not what sort shall prosper, whether this or that, or whether both shall be good alike.
Moreover the light is sweet, and it is good for the eyes to see the sun.
For even if a man should live many years, and rejoice in them all; yet let him remember the days of darkness; for they shall be many. All that comes is vanity.
Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth; and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart blameless, but not in the sight of thine eyes: yet know that for all these things God will bring thee into judgment.
Therefore remove sorrow from thy heart, and put away evil from thy flesh: for youth and folly are vanity.
Come down, sit on the ground, O virgin daughter of Babylon: sit on the ground, O daughter of the Chaldeans: for thou shalt no more be called tender and luxurious.
Take a millstone, grind meal: remove thy veil, uncover thy white hairs, make bare the leg, pass through the rivers.
Thy shame shall be uncovered, thy reproaches shall be brought to light: I will exact of thee due vengeance, I will no longer deliver thee to men.
Thy deliverer is the Lord of hosts, the Holy One of Israel is his name.
Sit thou down pierced with woe, go into darkness, O daughter of the Chaldeans: thou shalt no more be called the strength of a kingdom.
I have been provoked with my people; thou hast defiled mine inheritance: I gave them into thy hand, but thou didst not extend mercy to them: thou madest the yoke of the aged man very heavy,
and saidst, I shall be a princess for ever: thou didst not perceive these things in thine heart, nor didst thou remember the latter end.
But now hear these words, thou luxurious one, who art the one that sits at ease, that is secure, that says in her heart, I am, and there is not another; I shall not sit a widow, neither shall I know bereavement.
But now these two things shall come upon thee suddenly in one day, the loss of children and widowhood shall come suddenly upon thee, for thy sorcery, for the strength of thine enchantments,
for thy trusting in wickedness: for thou saidst, I am, and there is not another: know thou, the understanding of these things and thy harlotry shall be thy shame; for thou saidst in thy heart, I am, and there is not another.
And destruction shall come upon thee, and thou shalt not be aware; there shall be a pit, and thou shalt fall into it: and grief shall come upon thee, and thou shalt not be able to be clear; and destruction shall come suddenly upon thee, and thou shalt not know.
Stand now with thine enchantments, and with the abundance of thy sorcery, which thou hast learned from thy youth; if thou canst be profited.
Thou art wearied in thy counsels. Let now the astrologers of the heaven stand and deliver thee, let them that see the stars tell thee what is about to come upon thee.
Behold, they all shall be burnt up as sticks in the fire; neither shall they at all deliver their life from the flame. Because thou hast coals of fire, sit thou upon them;
these shall be thy help. Thou hast wearied thyself with traffic from thy youth: every man has wandered to his own home, but thou shalt have no deliverance.
But now the youngest have laughed me to scorn, now they reprove me in their turn, whose fathers I set at nought; whom I did not deem worthy to be with my shepherd dogs.
Yea, why had I the strength of their hands? for them the full term of life was lost.
One is childless in want and famine, such as they that fled but lately the distress and misery of drought.
Who compass the salt places on the sounding shore, who had salt herbs for their food, and were dishonorable and of no repute, in want of every good thing; who also ate roots of trees by reason of great hunger.
Thieves have risen up against me,
whose houses were the caves of the rocks, who lived under the wild shrubs.
They will cry out among the rustling bushes.
They are sons of fools and vile men, whose name and glory are quenched from off the earth.
But now I am their music, and they have me for a by-word.
And they stood aloof and abhorred me, and spared not to spit in my face.
For he has opened his quiver and afflicted me: they also have cast off the restraint of my presence.
My paths are ruined; for they have stripped off my raiment: he has shot at me with his weapons.
And he has pleaded against me as he will: I am overwhelmed with pains.
My pains return upon me; my hope is gone like the wind, and my safety as a cloud.
Even now my life shall be poured forth upon me; and days of anguish seize me.
And by night my bones are confounded; and my sinews are relaxed.
With great force my disease has taken hold of my garment: it has compassed me as the collar of my coat.
And thou hast counted me as clay; my portion in dust and ashes.
And I have cried to thee, but thou hearest me not: but they stood still, and observed me.
They attacked me also without mercy: thou hast scourged me with a strong hand.
And thou hast put me to grief, and hast cast me away from safety.
For I know that death will destroy me: for the earth is the house appointed for every mortal.
Yet I wept over every helpless man; I groaned when I saw a man in distress.
But I, when I waited for good things, behold, days of evils came the more upon me.
I am become a brother of monsters, and a companion of ostriches.
And my skin has been greatly blackened, and my bones are burned with heat.
My harp also has been turned into mourning, and my song into my weeping.
And the Lord said to Moses, I will yet bring one plague upon Pharao and upon Egypt, and after that he will send you forth thence; and whenever he sends you forth with every thing, he will indeed drive you out.
Speak therefore secretly in the ears of the people, and let every one ask of his neighbour jewels of silver and gold, and raiment.
And the Lord gave his people favour in the sight of the Egyptians, and they lent to them; and the man Moses was very great before the Egyptians, and before Pharao, and before his servants.
And Moses said, These things saith the Lord, About midnight I go forth into the midst of Egypt.
And every first-born in the land of Egypt shall die, from the first-born of Pharao that sits on the throne, even to the first-born of the woman-servant that is by the mill, and to the first-born of all cattle.
And there shall be a great cry through all the land of Egypt, such as has not been, and such shall not be repeated any more.
But among all the children of Israel shall not a dog snarl with his tongue, either at man or beast; that thou mayest know how wide a distinction the Lord will make between the Egyptians and Israel.
And all these thy servants shall come down to me, and do me reverence, saying, Go forth, thou and all the people over whom thou presidest, and afterwards I will go forth.
And Moses went forth from Pharao with wrath. And the Lord said to Moses, Pharao will not hearken to you, that I may greatly multiply my signs and wonders in the land of Egypt.
And Moses and Aaron wrought all these signs and wonders in the land of Egypt before Pharao; and the Lord hardened the heart of Pharao, and he did not hearken to send forth the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt.
O Lord, rebuke me not in thy wrath, neither chasten me in thine anger.
For thy weapons are fixed in me, and thou hast pressed thy hand heavily upon me.
For there is no health in my flesh because of thine anger; there is no peace to my bones because of my sins.
For my transgressions have gone over mine head: they have pressed heavily upon me like a weighty burden.
My bruises have become noisome and corrupt, because of my foolishness.
I have been wretched and bowed down continually: I went with a mourning countenance all the day.
For my soul is filled with mockings; and there is no health in my flesh.
I have been afflicted and brought down exceedingly: I have roared for the groaning of my heart.
But all my desire is before thee; and my groaning is not hidden from thee.
My heart is troubled, my strength has failed me; and the light of mine eyes is not with me.
My friends and my neighbours drew near before me, and stood still; and my nearest of kin stood afar off.
While they pressed hard upon me that sought my soul: and they that sought my hurt spoke vanities, and devised deceits all the day.
But I, as a deaf man, heard not; and was as a dumb man not opening his mouth.
And I was as a man that hears not, and who has no reproofs in his mouth.
For I hoped in thee, O Lord: thou wilt hear, O Lord my God.
For I said, Lest mine enemies rejoice against me: for when my feet were moved, they spoke boastingly against me.
For I am ready for plagues, and my grief is continually before me.
For I will declare mine iniquity, and be distressed for my sin.
But mine enemies live, and are mightier than I: and they that hate me unjustly are multiplied.
They that reward evil for good slandered me; because I followed righteousness.
Forsake me not, O Lord my God: depart not from me.
Draw nigh to my help, O Lord of my salvation.
And it came to pass when the king sat in his house, and the Lord had given him an inheritance on every side free from all his enemies round about him;
that the king said to Nathan the prophet, Behold now, I live in a house of cedar, and the ark of the Lord dwells in the midst of a tent.
And Nathan said to the king, Go and do all that is in thine heart, for the Lord is with thee.
And it came to pass in that night, that the word of the Lord came to Nathan, saying,
Go, and say to my servant David, Thus says the Lord, Thou shalt not build me a house for me to dwell in.
For I have not dwelt in a house from the day that I brought up the children of Israel out of Egypt to this day, but I have been walking in a lodge and in a tent,
wheresoever I went with all Israel. Have I ever spoken to any of the tribes of Israel, which I commanded to tend my people Israel, saying, Why have ye not built me a house of Cedar?
And now thus shalt thou say to my servant David, Thus says the Lord Almighty, I took thee from the sheep-cote, that thou shouldest be a prince over my people, over Israel.
And I was with thee wheresoever thou wentest, and I destroyed all thine enemies before thee, and I made thee renowned according to the renown of the great ones on the earth.
And I will appoint a place for my people Israel, and will plant them, and they shall dwell by themselves, and shall be no more distressed; and the son of iniquity shall no more afflict them, as he has done from the beginning,
from the days when I appointed judges over my people Israel: and I will give thee rest from all thine enemies, and the Lord will tell thee that thou shalt build a house to him.
And it shall come to pass when thy days shall have been fulfilled, and thou shalt sleep with thy fathers, that I will raise up thy seed after thee, even thine own issue, and I will establish his kingdom.
He shall build for me a house to my name, and I will set up his throne even for ever.
I will be to him a father, and he shall be to me a son. And when he happens to transgress, then will I chasten him with the rod of men, and with the stripes of the sons of men.
But my mercy I will not take from him, as I took it from those whom I removed from my presence.
And his house shall be made sure, and his kingdom for ever before me, and his throne shall be set up for ever.
According to all these words, and according to all this vision, so Nathan spoke to David.
And king David came in, and sat before the Lord, and said, Who am I, O Lord, my Lord, and what is my house, that thou hast loved me hitherto?
Whereas I was very little before thee, O Lord, my Lord, yet thou spokest concerning the house of thy servant for a long time to to come. And is this the law of man, O Lord, my Lord?
And what shall David yet say to thee? and now thou knowest thy servant, O Lord, my Lord.
And thou hast wrought for thy servant's sake, and according to thy heart thou hast wrought all this greatness, to make it known to thy servant,
that he may magnify thee, O my Lord; for there is no one like thee, and there is no God, but thou among all of whom we have heard with our ears.
And what other nation in the earth is as thy people Israel? whereas God was his guide, to redeem for himself a people to make thee a name, to do mightily and nobly, so that thou shouldest cast out nations an their tabernacles from the presence of thy people, whom thou didst redeem for thyself out of Egypt?
And thou has prepared for thyself thy people Israel to be a people for ever, and thou, Lord, art become their God.
And now, O my Lord, the Almighty Lord God of Israel, confirm the word for ever which thou hast spoken concerning thy servant and his house: and now as thou hast said,
Let thy name be magnified for ever.
Almighty Lord God of Israel, thou hast uncovered the ear of thy servant, saying, I will build thee a house: therefore thy servant has found in his heart to pray this prayer to thee.
And now, O Lord my Lord, thou art God; and thy words will be true, and thou hast spoken these good things concerning thy servant.
And now begin and bless the house of thy servant, that it may continue for ever before thee; for thou, O Lord, my Lord, hast spoken, and the house of thy servant shall be blessed with thy blessing so as to continue for ever.
And put my silver cup into the sack of the youngest, and the price of his corn. And it was done according to the word of Joseph, as he said.
The morning dawned, and the men were sent away, they and their asses.
And when they had gone out of the city, were not far off, then Joseph said to his steward, Arise, and pursue after the men; and thou shalt overtake them, and say to them, Why have ye returned evil for good?
And they said to him, Why does our lord speak according to these words? far be it from thy servants to do according to this word.
If we brought back to thee out of the land of Chanaan the money which we found in our sacks, how should we steal silver or gold out of the house of thy lord?
With whomsoever of thy servants thou shalt find the cup, let him die; and, moreover, we will be servants to our lord.
And he said, Now then it shall be as ye say; with whomsoever the cup shall be found, he shall be my servant, and ye shall be clear.
And we said to lord, The child will not be able to leave his father; but if he should leave his father, he will die.
But thou saidst to they servants, Except your younger brother come down with you, ye shall not see my face again.
And it came to pass, when we went up to thy servant our father, we reported to him the words of our lord.
And our father said, Go again, and buy us a little food.
And thy servant our father said to us, Ye know that my wife bore me two ;
and one is departed from me; and ye said that he was devoured of wild beasts, and I have not seen him until now.
If then ye take this one also from my presence, and an affliction happen to him by the way, then shall ye bring down my old age with sorrow to the grave.
Now then, if I should go in to they servant, and our father, and the boy should not be with us, (and his life depends on this life)
Hear these things, ye priests; and attend, O house of Israel; and hearken, O house of the king; for the controversy is with you, because ye have been a snare in Scopia, and as a net spread on Itabyrium,
And Ephraim saw his disease, and Judas his pain; then Ephraim went to the Assyrians, and sent ambassadors to king Jarim: but he could not heal you, and your pain shall in nowise cease from you.
Wherefore I am as a panther to Ephraim, and as a lion to the house of Juda: and I will tear, and go away; and I will take, and there shall be none to deliver.
I will go and return to my place, until they are brought to nought, and then shall they seek my face.
And these are the nations which the Lord left to prove Israel with them, all that had not known the wars of Chanaan.
Only for the sake of the generations of Israel, to teach them war, only the men before them knew them not.
The five lordships of the Phylistines, and every Chananite, and the Sidonian, and the Evite who dwelt in Libanus from the mount of Aermon to Laboemath.
And this was done in order to prove Israel by them, to know whether they would obey the commands of the Lord, which he charged their fathers by the hand of Moses.
And the children of Israel dwelt in the midst of the Chananite, and the Chettite, and the Amorite, and the Pherezite, and the Evite, and the Jebusite.
And they took their daughters for wives to themselves, and they gave their daughters to their sons, and served their gods.
And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord, and forgot the Lord their God, and served Baalim and the groves.
And the Lord was very angry with Israel, and sold them into the hand of Chusarsathaim king of Syria of the rivers: and the children of Israel served Chusarsathaim eight years.
And the children of Israel cried to the Lord; and the Lord raised up a saviour to Israel, and he saved them, Gothoniel the son of Kenez, the brother of Chaleb younger than himself.
And the Spirit of the Lord came upon him, and he judged Israel; and he went out to war against Chusarsathaim: and the Lord delivered into his hand Chusarsathaim king of Syria of the rivers, and his hand prevailed against Chusarsathaim.
And the land was quiet forty years; and Gothoniel the son of Kenez died.
And the children of Israel continued to do evil before the Lord: and the Lord strengthened Eglom king of Moab against Israel, because they had done evil before the Lord.
And he gathered to himself all the children of Ammon and Amalec, and went and smote Israel, and took possession of the city of Palm-trees.
And the children of Israel served Eglom the king of Moab eighteen years.
And the children of Israel cried to the Lord; and he raised up to them a saviour, Aod the son of Gera a son of Jemeni, a man who used both hands alike: and the children of Israel sent gifts by his hand to Eglom king of Moab.
And Aod made himself a dagger of two edges, of a span long, and he girded it under his cloak upon his right thigh.
And he went, and brought the presents to Eglom king of Moab, and Eglom was a very handsome man.
And it came to pass when Aod had made an end of offering his gifts, that he dismissed those that brought the gifts.
And he himself returned from the quarries that are by Galgal; and Aod said, I have a secret errand to thee, O king! and Eglom said to him, Be silent: and he sent away from his presence all who waited upon him.
And Aod went in to him; and he sat in his own upper summer chamber quite alone; and Aod said, I have a message from God to thee, O king: and Eglom rose up from his throne near him.
And it came to pass as he arose, that Aod stretched forth his left hand, and took the dagger off his right thigh, and plunged it into his belly;
and drove in also the haft after the blade, and the fat closed in upon the blade, for he drew not out the dagger from his belly.
And Aod went out to the porch, and passed out by the appointed guards, and shut the doors of the chamber upon him, and locked them.
And he went out: and Eglom's servants came, and saw, and behold, the doors of the upper chamber were locked; and they said, Does he not uncover his feet in the summer-chamber?
And they waited till they were ashamed, and, behold, there was no one that opened the doors of the upper chamber; and they took the key, and opened them; and, behold, their lord was fallen down dead upon the earth.
And Aod escaped while they were in a tumult, and no one paid attention to him; and he passed the quarries, and escaped to Setirotha.
And it came to pass when Aod came into the land of Israel, that he blew the horn in mount Ephraim, and the children of Israel came down with him from the mountain, and he was before them.
And he said to them, Come down after me, for the Lord God has delivered our enemies, even Moab, into our hand; and they went down after him, and seized on the fords of Jordan before Moab, and he did not suffer a man to pass over.
And they smote Moab on that day about ten thousand men, every lusty person and every mighty man; and not a man escaped.
So Moab was humbled in that day under the hand of Israel, and the land had rest eighty years; and Aod judged them till he died.
And after him rose up Samegar the son of Dinach, and smote the Philistines to the number of six hundred men with a ploughshare such as is drawn by oxen; and he too delivered Israel.
And Joshua gathered all the tribe of Israel to Selo, and convoked their elders, and their officers, and their judges, and set them before God.
And Joshua said to all the people, Thus says the Lord God of Israel, Your fathers at first sojourned beyond the river, even Thara, the father of Abraam and the father of Nachor; and they served other gods.
And I took your father Abraam from the other side of the river, and I guided him through all the land, and I multiplied his seed;
and I gave to him Isaac, and to Isaac Jacob and Esau: and I gave to Esau mount Seir for him to inherit: and Jacob and his sons went down to Egypt, and became there a great and populous and mighty nation: and the Egyptians afflicted them.
And I smote Egypt with the wonders that I wrought among them.
And afterwards God brought out our fathers from Egypt, and ye entered into the Red Sea; and the Egyptians pursued after our fathers with chariots and horses into the Red Sea.
And we cried aloud to the Lord; and he put a cloud and darkness between us and the Egyptians, and he brought the sea upon them, and covered them; and your eyes have seen all that the Lord did in the land of Egypt; and ye were in the wilderness many days.
And he brought us into the land of the Amorites that dwelt beyond Jordan, and the Lord delivered them into our hands; and ye inherited their land, and utterly destroyed them from before you.
And Balac, king of Moab, son of Sepphor, rose up, and made war against Israel, and sent and called Balaam to curse us.
But the Lord thy God would not destroy thee; and he greatly blessed us, and rescued us out of their hands, and delivered them to us.
And ye crossed over Jordan, and came to Jericho; and the inhabitants of Jericho fought against us, the Amorite, and the Chananite, and the Pherezite, and the Evite, and the Jebusite, and the Chettite, and the Gergesite, and the Lord delivered them into our hands.
And he sent forth the hornet before you; and he drove them out from before you, even twelve kings of the Amorites, not with thy sword, nor with thy bow.
And he gave you a land on which ye did not labour, and cities which ye did not build, and ye were settled in them; and ye eat of vineyards and oliveyards which ye did not plant.
And now fear the Lord, and serve him in righteousness and justice; and remove the strange gods, which our fathers served beyond the river, and in Egypt; and serve the Lord.
But if it seem not good to you to serve the Lord, choose to yourselves this day whom ye will serve, whether the gods of your fathers that were on the other side of the river, or the gods of the Amorites, among whom ye dwell upon their land: but I and my house will serve the Lord, for he is holy.
And the people answered and said, Far be it from us to forsake the Lord, so as to serve other gods.
The Lord our God, he is God; he brought up us and our fathers from Egypt, and kept us in all the way wherein we walked, and among all the nations through whom we passed.
And the Lord cast out the Amorite, and all the nations that inhabited the land from before us: yea, we will serve the Lord, for he is our God.
And Joshua said to the people, Indeed ye will not be able to serve the Lord, for God is holy; and he being jealous will not forgive your sins and your transgressions.
Whensoever ye shall forsake the Lord and serve other gods, then he shall come upon you and afflict you, and consume you, because he has done you good.
And the people said to Joshua, Nay, but we will serve the Lord.
And Joshua said to the people, Ye are witnesses against yourselves, that ye have chosen the Lord to serve him.
And now take away the strange gods that are among you, and set your heart right toward the Lord God of Israel.
And the people said to Joshua, We will serve the Lord, and we will hearken to his voice.
So Joshua made a covenant with the people on that day, and gave them a law and an ordinance in Selo before the tabernacle of the God of Israel.
And he wrote these words in the book of the laws of God: and Joshua took a great stone, and set it up under the oak before the Lord.
And Joshua said to the people, Behold, this stone shall be among you for a witness, for it has heard all the words that have been spoken to it by the Lord; for he has spoken to you this day; and this stone shall be among you for a witness in the last days, whenever ye shall deal falsely with the Lord my God.
And Joshua dismissed the people, and they went every man to his place.
And it came to pass after these things that Joshua the son of Naue the servant of the Lord died, at the age of a hundred and ten years.
And they buried him by the borders of his inheritance in Thamnasarach in the mount of Ephraim, northward of the mount of Galaad: there they put with him into the tomb in which they buried him, the knives of stone with which he circumcised the children of Israel in Galgala, when he brought them out of Egypt, as the Lord appointed them; and there they are to this day.
And Israel served the Lord all the days of Joshua, and all the days of the elders that lived as long as Joshua, and all that knew all the works of the Lord which he wrought for Israel.
And the children of Israel brought up the bones of Joseph out of Egypt, and buried them in Sicima, in the portion of the land which Jacob bought of the Amorites who dwelt in Sicima for a hundred ewe-lambs; and he gave it to Joseph for a portion.
And it came to pass afterwards that Eleazar the high-priest the son of Aaron died, and was buried in Gabaar of Phinees his son, which he gave him in mount Ephraim. In that day the children of Israel took the ark of God, and carried it about among them; and Phinees exercised the priest's office in the room of Eleazar his father till he died, and he was buried in his own place Gabaar: but the children of Israel departed every one to their place, and to their own city: and the children of Israel worshipped Astarte, and Astaroth, and the gods of the nations round about them; and the Lord delivered them into the hands of Eglom king of Moab and he ruled over them eighteen years.
Woe to them that write wickedness; for when they write they do write wickedness,
perverting the cause of the poor, violently wresting the judgment of the needy ones of my people, that the widow may be a prey to them, and the orphan a spoil.
And what will they do in the day of visitation? for affliction shall come to you from afar: and to whom will ye flee for help? and where will ye leave your glory,
that ye may not fall into captivity? For all this his wrath is not turned away, but his hand is yet exalted.
Woe to the Assyrians; the rod of my wrath, and anger are in their hands.
I will send my wrath against a sinful nation, and I will charge my people to take plunder and spoil, and to trample the cities, and to make them dust.
But he meant not thus, neither did he devise thus in his soul: but his mind shall change, and that to destroy nations not a few.
And if they should say to him, Thou alone art ruler;
then shall he say, Have I not taken the country above Babylon and Chalanes, where the tower was built? and have I not taken Arabia, and Damascus, and Samaria?
As I have taken them, I will also take all the kingdoms: howl, ye idols in Jerusalem, and in Samaria.
For as I did to Samaria and her idols, so will I do also to Jerusalem and her idols.
And it shall come to pass, when the Lord shall have finished doing all things on Mount Sion and Jerusalem, that I will visit upon the proud heart, even upon the ruler of the Assyrians, and upon the boastful haughtiness of his eyes.
For he said, I will act in strength, and in the wisdom of my understanding I will remove the boundaries of nations, and will spoil their strength.
And I will shake the inhabited cities: and I will take with my hand all the world as a nest: and I will even take them as eggs that have been left; and there is none that shall escape me, or contradict me.
Shall the axe glorify itself without him that hews with it? or shall the saw lift up itself without him that uses it, as if one should lift a rod or staff? but it shall not be so;
but the Lord of hosts shall send dishonour upon thine honour, and burning fire shall be kindled upon thy glory.
And the light of Israel shall be for a fire, and he shall sanctify him with burning fire, and it shall devour the wood as grass.
In that day the mountains shall be consumed, and the hills, and the forests, and fire shall devour both soul and body: and he that flees shall be as one fleeing from burning flame.
And they that are left of them shall be a small number, and a child shall write them.
And it shall come to pass in that day that the remnant of Israel shall no more join themselves with, and the saved of Jacob shall no more trust in, them that injured them; but they shall trust in the Holy God of Israel, in truth.
And the remnant of Jacob shall trust on the mighty God.
And though the people of Israel be as the sand of the sea, a remnant of them shall be saved.
He will finish the work, and cut it short in righteousness: because the Lord will make a short work in all the world.
Therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts, Be not afraid, my people who dwell in Sion, of the Assyrians, because he shall smite thee with a rod: for I am bringing a stroke upon thee, that thou mayest see the way of Egypt.
For yet a little while, and the indignation shall cease: but my wrath shall be against their council.
And God will stir up enemies against them, according to the stroke of Madiam in the place of affliction: and his wrath shall be by the way of the sea, even to the way that leads to Egypt.
And it shall come to pass in that day, that his yoke shall be taken away from thy shoulder, and his fear from thee, and the yoke shall be destroyed from off your shoulders.
For he shall arrive at the city of Angai, and shall pass on to Maggedo, and shall lay up his stores in Machmas.
And he shall pass by the valley, and shall arrive at Angai: fear shall seize upon Rama, the city of Saul.
The daughter of Gallim shall flee; Laisa shall hear; one shall hear in Anathoth.
Madebena also is amazed, and the inhabitants of Gibbir.
Exhort ye them to-day to remain in the way: exhort ye beckoning with the hand the mountain, the daughter of Sion, even ye hills that are in Jerusalem.
Behold, the Lord, the Lord of hosts, will mightily confound the glorious ones; and the haughty in pride shall be crushed, and the lofty shall be brought low:
and the lofty ones shall fall by the sword, and the Libanus shall fall with his lofty ones.
When the Lord turned the captivity of Sion, we became as comforted ones.
Then was our mouth filled with joy, and our tongue with exultation: then would they say among the Gentiles,
The Lord has done great things among them. The Lord has done great things for us, we became joyful.
Turn, O Lord, our captivity, as the steams in the south.
They that sow in tears shall reap in joy.
They went on and wept as they cast their seeds; but they shall surely come with exultation, bringing their sheaves with them.
O God, hearken to my petition; attend to my prayer.
From the ends of the earth have I cried to thee, when my heart was in trouble: thou liftedst me up on a rock thou didst guide me:
because thou wert my hope, a tower of strength from the face of the enemy.
I will dwell in thy tabernacle for ever; I will shelter myself under the shadow of thy wings. Pause.
For thou, o God, hast heard my prayers; thou hast given an inheritance to them that fear thy name.
Thou shalt add days to the days of the king; thou shalt lengthen his years to all generations.
He shall endure for ever before God: which of them will seek out his mercy and truth?
So will I sing to thy name for ever and ever, that I may daily perform my vows.
Boast not of to-morrow; for thou knowest not what the next day shall bring forth.
Let thy neighbour, and not thine own mouth, praise thee; a stranger, and not thine own lips.
A stone is heavy, and sand cumbersome; but a fool's wrath is heavier than both.
Wrath is merciless, and anger sharp: but envy can bear nothing.
Open reproofs are better than secret love.
The wounds of a friend are more to be trusted than the spontaneous kisses of an enemy.
A full soul scorns honeycombs; but to a hungry soul even bitter things appear sweet.
As when a bird flies down from its own nest, so a man is brought into bondage whenever he estranges himself from his own place.
The heart delights in ointments and wines and perfumes: but the soul is broken by calamities.
Thine own friend, and thy father's friend, forsake not; and when thou art in distress go not into thy brother's house: better is a friend that is near than a brother living far off.
Son, be wise, that thy heart may rejoice; and remove thou from thyself reproachful words.
A wise man, when evils are approaching, hides himself; but fools pass on, and will be punished.
Take away the man's garment, (for a scorner has passed by) whoever lays waste another's goods.
Whosoever shall bless a friend in the morning with a loud voice, shall seem to differ nothing from one who curses him.
On a stormy day drops of rain drive a man out of his house; so also does a railing woman drive a man out of his own house.
The north wind is sharp, but it is called by name propitious.
Iron sharpens iron; and a man sharpens his friend's countenance.
He that plants a fig-tree shall eat the fruits of it: so he that waits on his own master shall be honoured.
As faces are not like other faces, so neither are the thoughts of men.
Hell and destruction are not filled; so also are the eyes of men insatiable. He that fixes his eye is an abomination to the Lord; and the uninstructed do not restrain their tongue.
Fire is the trial for silver and gold; and a man is tried by the mouth of them that praise him. The heart of the transgressor seeks after mischiefs; but an upright heart seeks knowledge.
Though thou scourge a fool, disgracing him in the midst of the council, thou wilt still in no wise remove his folly from him.
Do thou thoroughly know the number of thy flock, and pay attention to thine herds.
For a man has not strength and power for ever; neither does he transmit it from generation to generation.
Take care of the herbage in the field, and thou shalt cut grass, and gather the mountain hay;
that thou mayest have wool of sheep for clothing: pay attention to the land, that thou mayest have lambs.
My son, thou hast from me words very useful for thy life, and for the life of thy servants.
And there came men who were unclean by reason of a dead body, and they were not able to keep the passover on that day; and they came before Moses and Aaron on that day.
And those men said to Moses, We are unclean by reason of the dead body of a man: shall we therefore fail to offer the gift to the Lord in its season in the midst of the children of Israel?
And Moses said to them, stand there, and I will hear what charge the Lord will give concerning you.
And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the children of Israel, saying, Whatever man shall be unclean by reason of a dead body, or on a journey far off, among you, or among your posterity; he shall then keep the passover to the Lord,
in the second month, on the fourteenth day; in the evening they shall offer it, with unleavened bread and bitter herbs shall they eat it.
They shall not leave of it until the morrow, and they shall not break a bone of it; they shall sacrifice it according to the ordinance of the passover.
And whatsoever man shall be clean, and is not far off on a journey, and shall fail to keep the passover, that soul shall be cut off from his people, because he has not offered the gift to the Lord in its season: that man shall bear his iniquity.
And if there should come to you a stranger in your land, and should keep the passover to the Lord, he shall keep it according to the law of the passover and according to its ordinance: there shall be one law for you, both for the stranger, and for the native of the land.
And in the day in which the tabernacle was pitched the cloud covered the tabernacle, the place of the testimony; and in the evening there was upon the tabernacle as the appearance of fire till the morning.
So it was continually: the cloud covered it by day, and the appearance of fire by night.
And when the cloud went up from the tabernacle, then after that the children of Israel departed; and in whatever place the cloud rested, there the children of Israel encamped.
The children of Israel shall encamp by the command of the Lord, and by the command of the Lord they shall remove: all the days in which the cloud overshadows the tabernacle, the children of Israel shall encamp. And whenever the cloud shall be drawn over the tabernacle for many days, then the children of Israel shall keep the charge of God, and they shall not remove.
And it shall be, whenever the cloud overshadows the tabernacle a number of days, they shall encamp by the word of the Lord, and shall remove by the command of the Lord.
And it shall come to pass, whenever the cloud shall remain from the evening till the morning, and in the morning the cloud shall go up, then shall they remove by day or by night.
And she lodged with her mother-in-law: and Noemin her mother-in-law said to her, My daughter, shall I not seek rest for thee, that it may be well with thee?
And now is not Booz our kinsman, with whose damsels thou wast? behold, he winnows barley this night in the floor.
But do thou wash, and anoint thyself, and put thy raiment upon thee, and go up to the threshing-floor: do not discover thyself to the man until he has done eating and drinking.
And it shall come to pass when he lies down, that thou shalt mark the place where he lies down, and shalt come and lift up the covering of his feet, and shalt lie down; and he shall tell thee what thou shalt do.
And Ruth said to her, All that thou shalt say, I will do.
And she went down to the threshing-floor, and did according to all that her mother-in-law enjoined her.
And Booz ate and drank, and his heart was glad, and he came to lie down by the side of the heap of corn; and she came secretly, and lifted up the covering of his feet.
And it came to pass at midnight that the man was amazed, and troubled, and behold, a woman lay at his feet.
And he said, Who art thou? and she said, I am thine handmaid Ruth; spread therefore thy skirt over thine handmaid, for thou art a near relation.
And Booz said, Blessed be thou of the Lord God, my daughter, for thou hast made thy latter kindness greater than the former, in that thou followest not after young men, whether any be poor or rich.
And now fear not, my daughter, whatever thou shalt say I will do to thee; for all the tribe of my people knows that thou art a virtuous woman.
And now I am truly akin to thee; nevertheless there is a kinsman nearer than I.
Lodge here for the night, and it shall be in the morning, if he will do the part of a kinsman to thee, welllet him do it: but if he will not do the part of a kinsman to thee, I will do the kinsman's part to thee, as the Lord lives; lie down till the morning.
And she lay at his feet until the morning; and she rose up before a man could know his neighbour; and Booz said, Let it not be known that a woman came into the floor.
And he said to her, Bring the apron that is upon thee: and she held it, and he measured six measures of barley, and put them upon her, and she went into the city.
And Ruth went in to her mother-in-law, and she said to her, My daughter! and Ruth told her all that the man had done to her.
And she said to her, He gave me these six measures of barley, for he said to me, Go not empty to thy mother-in-law.
And she said, Sit still, my daughter, until thou shalt know how the matter will fall out; for the man will not rest until the matter be accomplished this day.
And the Lord said to Joshua, Fear not, nor be timorous: take with thee all the men of war, and arise, go up to Gai; behold, I have given into thy hands the king of Gai, and his land.
And thou shalt do to Gai, as thou didst to Jericho and its king; and thou shalt take to thyself the spoil of its cattle; set now for thyself an ambush for the city behind.
And Joshua and all the men of war rose to go up to Gai; and Joshua chose out thirty thousand mighty men, and he sent them away by night.
And he charged them, saying, Do ye lie in ambush behind the city: do not go far from the city, and ye shall all be ready.
Land I and all with me will draw near to the city: and it shall come to pass when the inhabitants of Gai shall come forth to meet us, as before, that we will flee from before them.
And when they shall come out after us, we will draw them away from the city; and they will say, These men flee from before us, as also before.
And ye shall rise up out of the ambuscade, and go into the city.
Ye shall do according to this word, lo! I have commanded you.
And Joshua sent them, and they went to lie in ambush; and they lay between Baethel and Gai, westward of Gai.
And Joshua rose up early in the morning, and numbered the people; and he went up, he and the elders before the people to Gai.
And all the men of war went up with him, and they went forward and came over against the city eastward.
And the ambuscade was on the west side of the city.
And it came to pass when the king of Gai saw it, he hasted and went out to meet them direct to the battle, he and all the people that were with him: and he knew not that there was an ambuscade formed against him behind the city.
And Joshua and Israel saw, and retreated from before them.
And they pursued after the children of Israel, and they themselves went to a distance from the city.
There was no one left in Gai who did not pursue after Israel; and they left the city open, and pursued after Israel.
And the Lord said to Joshua, Stretch forth thy hand with the spear that is in thy hand toward the city, for I have delivered it into thy hands; and the liers in wait shall rise up quickly out of their place.
And Joshua stretched out his hand and his spear toward the city, and the ambuscade rose up quickly out of their place; and they came forth when he stretched out his hand; and they entered into the city, and took it; and they hasted and burnt the city with fire.
And when the inhabitants of Gai looked round behind them, then they saw the smoke going up out of the city to heaven, and they were no longer able to flee this way or that way.
And Joshua and all Israel saw that the ambuscade had taken the city, and that the smoke of the city went up to heaven; and they turned and smote the men of Gai.
And these came forth out of the city to meet them; and they were in the midst of the army, some being on this side, and some on that; and they smote them until there was not left of them one who survived and escaped.
And they took the king of Gai alive, and brought him to Joshua.
And when the children of Israel had ceased slaying all that were in Gai, and in the fields, and in the mountain on the descent, from whence they pursued them even to the end, then Joshua returned to Gai, and smote it with the edge of the sword.
And they that fell in that day, men and women, were twelve thousand: they slew all the inhabitants of Gai.
Beside the spoils that were in the city, all things which the children of Israel took as spoil for themselves according to the command of the Lord, as the Lord commanded Joshua.
And Joshua burnt the city with fire: he made it an uninhabited heap for ever, even to this day.
And he hanged the king of Gai on a gallows; and he remained on the tree till evening: and when the sun went down, Joshua gave charge, and they took down his body from the tree, and cast it into a pit, and they set over him a heap of stones until this day.
He that loveth his son causeth him oft to feel the rod, that he may have joy of him in the end.
He that chastiseth his son shall have joy in him, and shall rejoice of him among his acquaintance.
He that teacheth his son grieveth the enemy: and before his friends he shall rejoice of him.
Though his father die, yet he is as though he were not dead: for he hath left one behind him that is like himself.
While he lived, he saw and rejoiced in him: and when he died, he was not sorrowful.
He left behind him an avenger against his enemies, and one that shall requite kindness to his friends.
He that maketh too much of his son shall bind up his wounds; and his bowels will be troubled at every cry.
An horse not broken becometh headstrong: and a child left to himself will be wilful.
Cocker thy child, and he shall make thee afraid: play with him, and he will bring thee to heaviness.
Laugh not with him, lest thou have sorrow with him, and lest thou gnash thy teeth in the end.
Give him no liberty in his youth, and wink not at his follies.
Bow down his neck while he is young, and beat him on the sides while he is a child, lest he wax stubborn, and be disobedient unto thee, and so bring sorrow to thine heart.
Chastise thy son, and hold him to labour, lest his lewd behaviour be an offence unto thee.
Better is the poor, being sound and strong of constitution, than a rich man that is afflicted in his body.
Health and good estate of body are above all gold, and a strong body above infinite wealth.
There is no riches above a sound body, and no joy above the joy of the heart.
Death is better than a bitter life or continual sickness.
Delicates poured upon a mouth shut up are as messes of meat set upon a grave.
What good doeth the offering unto an idol? for neither can it eat nor smell: so is he that is persecuted of the Lord.
He seeth with his eyes and groaneth, as an eunuch that embraceth a virgin and sigheth.
Give not over thy mind to heaviness, and afflict not thyself in thine own counsel.
The gladness of the heart is the life of man, and the joyfulness of a man prolongeth his days.
Love thine own soul, and comfort thy heart, remove sorrow far from thee: for sorrow hath killed many, and there is no profit therein.
Envy and wrath shorten the life, and carefulness bringeth age before the time.
FOR EGYPT, AGAINST THE POWER OF PHARAO NECHAO KING OF EGYPT, who was by the river Euphrates in Charmis, whom Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon smote in the fourth year of Joakim king of Juda.
The waters of Egypt shall come up like a river: and he said, I will go up, and will cover the earth, and will destroy the dwellers in it.
Mount ye the horses, prepare the chariots; go forth, ye warriors of the Ethiopians, and Libyans armed with shields; and mount, ye Lydians, bend the bow.
And that day shall be to the Lord our God a day of vengeance, to take vengeance on his enemies: and the sword of the Lord shall devour, and be glutted, and be drunken with their blood: for the Lord has a sacrifice from the land of the north at the river Euphrates.
Go up to Galaad, and take balm for the virgin daughter of Egypt: in vain hast thou multiplied thy medicines; there is no help in thee.
The nations have heard thy voice, and the land has been filled with thy cry: for the warriors have fainted fighting one against another, and both are fallen together.
THE WORDS WHICH THE LORD SPOKE by Jeremias, concerning the coming of the king of Babylon to smite the land of Egypt.
Proclaim it at Magdol, and declare it at Memphis: say ye, Stand up, and prepare; for the sword has devoured thy yew-tree.
Wherefore has Apis fled from thee? thy choice calf has not remained; for the Lord has utterly weakened him.
And thy multitude has fainted and fallen; and each one said to his neighbour, Let us arise, and return into our country to our people, from the Grecian sword.
Call ye the name of Pharao Nechao king of Egypt, Saon esbeie moed.
As I live, saith the Lord God, he shall come as Itabyrion among the mountains, and as Carmel that is on the sea.
O daughter of Egypt dwelling at home, prepare thee stuff for removing: for Memphis shall be utterly desolate, and shall be called Woe, because there are no inhabitants in it.
The Lord said to my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool.
The Lord shall send out a rod of power for thee out of Sion: rule thou in the midst of thine enemies.
With thee is dominion in the day of thy power, in the splendours of thy saints: I have begotten thee from the womb before the morning.
The Lord sware, and will not repent, Thou art a priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedec.
The Lord at thy right hand has dashed in pieces kings in the day of his wrath.
He shall judge among the nations, he shall fill up the number of corpses, he shall crush the heads of many on the earth.
He shall drink of the brook in the way; therefore shall he lift up the head.
Observe the month of new corn, and thou shalt sacrifice the passover to the Lord thy God; because in the month of new corn thou camest out of Egypt by night.
And thou shalt sacrifice the passover to the Lord thy God, sheep and oxen in the place which the Lord thy God shall choose to have his name called upon it.
Thou shalt not eat leaven with it; seven days shalt thou eat unleavened bread with it, bread of affliction, because ye came forth out of Egypt in haste; that ye may remember the day of your coming forth out of the land of Egypt all the days of your life.
Leaven shall not be seen with thee in all thy borders for seven days, and there shall not be left of the flesh which thou shalt sacrifice at even on the first day until the morning.
thou shalt not have power to sacrifice the passover in any of the cities, which the Lord thy God gives thee.
But in the place which the Lord thy God shall choose, to have his name called there, thou shalt sacrifice the passover at even at the setting of the sun, at the time when thou camest out of Egypt.
And thou shalt boil and roast and eat it in the place, which the Lord thy God shall choose; and thou shalt return in the morning, and go to thy house.
Six days shalt thou eat unleavened bread, and on the seventh day is a holiday, a feast to the Lord thy God: thou shalt not do in it any work, save what must be done by any one.
Seven weeks shalt thou number to thyself; when thou hast begun to put the sickle to the corn, thou shalt begin to number seven weeks.
And thou shalt keep the feast of weeks to the Lord thy God, accordingly as thy hand has power in as many things as the Lord thy God shall give thee.
And thou shalt rejoice before the Lord thy God, thou and thy son, and thy daughter, thy man-servant and thy maid-servant, and the Levite, and the stranger, and the orphan, and the widow which dwells among you, in whatsoever place the Lord thy God shall choose, that his name should be called there.
And thou shalt remember that thou wast a servant in the land of Egypt, and thou shalt observe and do these commands.
Thou shalt keep for thyself the feast of tabernacles seven days, when thou gatherest in thy produce from thy corn-floor and thy wine-press.
And thou shalt rejoice in thy feast, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, thy man-servant, and thy maid-servant, and the Levite, and the stranger, and the orphan, and the widow that is in thy cities.
Seven days shalt thou keep a feast to the Lord thy God in the place which the Lord thy God shall choose for himself; and if the Lord thy God shall bless thee in all thy fruits, and in every work of thy hands, then thou shalt rejoice.
Three times in the year shall all thy males appear before the Lord thy God in the place which the Lord shall choose in the feast of unleavened bread, and in the feast of weeks, and in the feast of tabernacles: thou shalt not appear before the Lord thy God empty.
Each one according to his ability, according to the blessing of the Lord thy God which he has given thee.
Thou shalt make for thyself judges and officers in thy cities, which the Lord thy God gives thee in thy tribes, and they shall judge the people with righteous judgment:
they shall not wrest judgment, nor favour persons, nor receive a gift; for gifts blind the eyes of the wise, and pervert the words of the righteous.
Thou shalt justly pursue justice, that ye may live, and go in and inherit the land which the Lord thy God gives thee.
Thou shalt not plant for thyself a grove; thou shalt not plant for thyself any tree near the altar of thy God.
Thou shalt not set up for thyself a pillar, which the Lord thy God hates.
Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the Lord, when I will cause to be heard in Rabbath a tumult of wars; and they shall become a waste and ruined place, and her altars shall be burned with fire; then shall Israel succeed to his dominion.
Howl, O Esebon, for Gai has perished; cry, ye daughters of Rabbath, gird yourselves with sack-clothes, and lament; for Melchol shall go into banishment, his priests and his princes together.
Why do ye exult in the plains of the Enakim, thou haughty daughter, that trustest in thy treasures, that sayest, Who shall come in to me?
Behold, I will bring terror upon thee, saith the Lord, from all the country round about thee; and ye shall be scattered every one right before him, and there is none to gather you.
Blessed is the man that hath a virtuous wife, for the number of his days shall be double.
A virtuous woman rejoiceth her husband, and he shall fulfil the years of his life in peace.
A good wife is a good portion, which shall be given in the portion of them that fear the Lord.
Whether a man be rich or poor, if he have a good heart toward the Lord, he shall at all times rejoice with a cheerful countenance.
There be three things that mine heart feareth; and for the fourth I was sore afraid: the slander of a city, the gathering together of an unruly multitude, and a false accusation: all these are worse than death.
But a grief of heart and sorrow is a woman that is jealous over another woman, and a scourge of the tongue which communicateth with all.
An evil wife is a yoke shaken to and fro: he that hath hold of her is as though he held a scorpion.
A drunken woman and a gadder abroad causeth great anger, and she will not cover her own shame.
The whoredom of a woman may be known in her haughty looks and eyelids.
If thy daughter be shameless, keep her in straitly, lest she abuse herself through overmuch liberty.
Watch over an impudent eye: and marvel not if she trespass against thee.
She will open her mouth, as a thirsty traveller when he hath found a fountain, and drink of every water near her: by every hedge will she sit down, and open her quiver against every arrow.
The grace of a wife delighteth her husband, and her discretion will fatten his bones.
A silent and loving woman is a gift of the Lord; and there is nothing so much worth as a mind well instructed.
A shamefaced and faithful woman is a double grace, and her continent mind cannot be valued.
As the sun when it ariseth in the high heaven; so is the beauty of a good wife in the ordering of her house.
As the clear light is upon the holy candlestick; so is the beauty of the face in ripe age.
As the golden pillars are upon the sockets of silver; so are the fair feet with a constant heart.
There be two things that grieve my heart; and the third maketh me angry: a man of war that suffereth poverty; and men of understanding that are not set by; and one that returneth from righteousness to sin; the Lord prepareth such an one for the sword.
A merchant shall hardly keep himself from doing wrong; and an huckster shall not be freed from sin.
My words have been spoken by Godthe oracular answer of a king, whom his mother instructed.
What wilt thou keep, my son, what? the words of God. My firstborn son, I speak to thee: what? son of my womb? what? son of my vows?
Give not thy wealth to women, nor thy mind and living to remorse. Do all things with counsel: drink wine with counsel.
Princes are prone to anger: let them then not drink wine:
lest they drink, and forget wisdom, and be not able to judge the poor rightly.
Give strong drink to those that are in sorrow, and the wine to drink to those in pain:
that they may forget their poverty, and may not remember their troubles any more.
Open thy mouth with the word of God, and judge all fairly.
Open thy mouth and judge justly, and plead the cause of the poor and weak.
Who shall find a virtuous woman? for such a one is more valuable than precious stones.
The heart of her husband trusts in her: such a one shall stand in no need of fine spoils.
For she employs all her living for her husband's good.
Gathering wool and flax, she makes it serviceable with her hands.
She is like a ship trading from a distance: so she procures her livelihood.
And she rises by night, and gives food to her household, and appointed tasks to her maidens.
She views a farm, and buys it: and with the fruit of her hands she plants and a possession.
She strongly girds her loins, and strengthens her arms for work.
And she finds by experience that working is good; and her candle goes not out all night.
She reaches forth her arms to needful works, and applies her hands to the spindle.
Her husband is not anxious about those at home when he tarries anywhere abroad: for all her household are clothed.
She makes for her husband clothes of double texture, and garments for herself of fine linen and scarlet.
And her husband becomes a distinguished person in the gates, when he sits in council with the old inhabitants of the land.
She makes fine linens, and sells girdles to the Chananites: she opens her mouth heedfully and with propriety, and controls her tongue.
But she opens her mouth wisely, and according to law.
The ways of her household are careful, and she eats not the bread of idleness.
And her kindness to them sets up her children for them, and they grow rich, and her husband praises her.
Many daughters have obtained wealth, many have wrought valiantly; but thou hast exceeded, thou hast surpassed all.
Charms are false, and woman's beauty is vain: for it is a wise woman that is blessed, and let her praise the fear the Lord.
Give her of the fruit of her lips; and let her husband be praised in the gates.
And it came to pass when Laban heard the name of Jacob, his sister's son, he ran to meet him, and embraced and kissed him, and brought him into his house; and he told Laban all these sayings.
And Laban said to him, Thou art of my bones and of my flesh; and he was with him a full month.
And Laban said to Jacob, Surely thou shalt not serve me for nothing, because thou art my brother; tell me what thy reward is to be.
And Laban said to him, better that I should give her to thee, than that I should give her to another man; dwell with me.
And Jacob served for Rachel seven years, and they were before him as a few days, by reason of his loving her.
And Jacob said to Laban, Give me my wife, for my days are fulfilled, that I may go in to her.
And Laban gathered together all the men of the place, and made a marriage-feast.
And it was morning, and behold it was Lea; and Jacob said to Laban, What is this that thou hast done to me? did I not serve thee for Rachel? and wherefore hast thou deceived me?
And having conceived yet again, she bore a son, and said, Now yet again this time will I give thanks to the Lord; therefore she called his name, Juda; and ceased bearing.
And it came to pass when Samuel was old, that he made his sons judges over Israel.
And these are the names of his sons; Joel the first-born, and the name of the second Abia, judges in Bersabee.
And his sons did not walk in his way; and they turned aside after gain, and took gifts, and perverted judgments.
And the men of Israel gather themselves together, and come to Armathaim to Samuel,
and they said to him, Behold, thou art grown old, and thy sons walk not in thy way; and now set over us a king to judge us, as also the other nations have.
And the thing was evil in the eyes of Samuel, when they said, Give us a king to judge us: and Samuel prayed to the Lord.
And the Lord said to Samuel, Hear the voice of the people, in whatever they shall say to thee; for they have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me from reigning over them.
According to all their doings which they have done to me, from the day that I brought them out of Egypt until this day, even as they have deserted me, and served other gods, so they do also to thee.
And now hearken to their voice; only thou shalt solemnly testify to them, and thou shalt describe to them the manner of the king who shall reign over them.
And Samuel spoke every word of the Lord to the people who asked of him a king.
And he said, This shall be the manner of the king that shall rule over you: he shall take your sons, and put them in his chariots, and among his horsemen, and running before his chariots,
and his manner shall be to make them to himself captains of hundreds and captains of thousands; and to reap his harvest, and gather his vintage, and prepare his instruments of war, and the implements of his chariots.
And he will take your daughters to be perfumers, and cooks, and bakers.
And he will take your fields, and your vineyards, and your good oliveyards, and give them to his servants.
And he will take the tithe of your seeds and your vineyards, and give it to his eunuchs, and to his servants.
And he will take your servants, and your handmaids, and your good herds and your asses, and will take the tenth of them for his works.
And he will tithe your flocks; and ye shall be his servants.
And ye shall cry out in that day because of your king whom ye have chosen to yourselves, and the Lord shall not hear you in those days, because ye have chosen to yourselves a king.
But the people would not hearken to Samuel; and they said to him, Nay, but there shall be a king over us.
An we also will be like all the nations; and our king shall judge us, and shall go out before us, and fight our battles.
And Samuel heard all the words of the people, and spoke them in the ears of the Lord.
And the Lord said to Samuel, Hearken to their voice, and appoint them a king. And Samuel said to the men of Israel, Let each man depart to his city.
Praise ye the Lord from the heavens: praise him in the highest.
Praise ye him, all his angels: praise ye him, all his hosts.
Praise him, sun and moon; praise him, all ye stars and light.
Praise him, ye heavens of heavens, and the water that is above the heavens.
Let them praise the name of the Lord: for he spoke, and they were made; he commanded, and they were created.
He has established them for ever, even for ever and ever: he has made an ordinance, and it shall not pass away.
Praise the Lord from the earth, ye serpents, and all deeps.
Fire, hail, snow, ice, stormy wind; the things that perform his word.
Mountains, and all hills; fruitful trees, and all cedars:
wild beasts, and all cattle; reptiles, and winged birds:
kings of the earth, and all peoples; princes, and all judges of the earth:
young men and virgins, old men with youths:
let them praise the name of the Lord: for his name only is exalted; his praise is above the earth and heaven,
and he shall exalt the horn of his people, there is a hymn for all his saints, even of the children of Israel, a people who draw near to him.
And he said, Take thy son, the beloved one, whom thou hast lovedIsaac, and go into the high land, and offer him there for a whole-burnt-offering on one of the mountains which I will tell thee of.
And Abraam rose up in the morning and saddled his ass, and he took with him two servants, and Isaac his son, and having split wood for a whole-burnt-offering, he arose and departed, and came to the place of which God spoke to him,
on the third day; and Abraam having lifted up his eyes, saw the place afar off.
And Abraam said to his servants, Sit ye here with the ass, and I and the lad will proceed thus far, and having worshipped we will return to you.
And Abraam took the wood of the whole-burnt-offering, and laid it on Isaac his son, and he took into his hands both the fire and the knife, and the two went together.
And Isaac said to Abraam his father, Father. And he said, What is it, son? And he said, Behold the fire and the wood, where is the sheep for a whole-burnt-offering?
And Abraam said, God will provide himself a sheep for a whole-burnt-offering, son. And both having gone together,
came to the place which God spoke of to him; and there Abraam built the altar, and laid the wood on it, and having bound the feet of Isaac his son together, he laid him on the altar upon the wood.
And an angel of the Lord called him out of heaven, and said, Abraam, Abraam. And he said, Behold, I .
surely blessing I will bless thee, and multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the stars of heaven, and as the sand which is by the shore of the sea, and thy seed shall inherit the cities of their enemies.
And in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed, because thou hast hearkened to my voice.
And Abraam returned to his servants, and they arose and went together to the well of the oath; and Abraam dwelt at the well of the oath.
And it came to pass after these things, that it was reported to Abraam, saying, Behold, Melcha herself too has born sons to Nachor thy brother,
Your carcases shall fall in this wilderness; and all those of you that were reviewed, and those of you that were numbered from twenty years old and upward, all that murmured against me,
ye shall not enter into the land for which I stretched out my hand to establish you upon it; except only Chaleb the son of Jephonne, and Joshua the son of Naue.
And your little ones, who ye said should be a prey, them will I bring into the land; and they shall inherit the land, which ye rejected.
And your carcases shall fall in this wilderness.
And your sons shall be fed in the wilderness forty years, and they shall bear your fornication, until your carcases be consumed in the wilderness.
According to the number of the days during which ye spied the land, forty days, a day for a year, ye shall bear your sins forty years, and ye shall know my fierce anger.
the men that spoke evil reports against the land, even died of the plague before the Lord.
And Joshua the son of Naue and Chaleb the son of Jephonne still lived of those men that went to spy out the land.
And Moses spoke these words to all the children of Israel; and the people mourned exceedingly.
Go not up, for the Lord is not with you; so shall ye fall before the face of your enemies.
For Amalec and the Chananite are there before you, and ye shall fall by the sword; because ye have disobeyed the Lord and turned aside, and the Lord will not be among you.
And having forced their passage, they went up to the top of the mountain; but the ark of the covenant of the Lord and Moses stirred not out of the camp.
And Amalec and the Chananite that dwelt in that mountain came down, and routed them, and destroyed them unto Herman; and they returned to the camp.
There was a certain man in the land of Ausis, whose name was Job; and than man was true, blameless, righteous, and godly, abstaining from everything evil.
And he had seven sons and three daughters.
And his cattle consisted of seven thousand sheep, three thousand camels, five hundred yoke of oxen, five hundred she-asses in the pastures, and a very great household, and he had a great husbandry on the earth; and that man was most noble of the men of the east.
And his sons visiting one another prepared a banquet every day, taking with them also their three sisters to eat and drink with them.
And when the days of the banquet were completed, Job sent and purified them, having risen up in the morning, and offered sacrifices for them, according to their number, and one calf for a sin-offering for their souls: for Job said, Lest peradventure my sons have thought evil in their minds against God. Thus, then Job did continually.
And it came to pass on a day, that behold, the angels of God came to stand before the Lord, and the devil came with them.
And the Lord said to the devil, Whence art thou come? And the devil answered the Lord, and said, I am come from compassing the earth, and walking up and down in the world.
And the Lord said to him, Hast thou diligently considered my servant Job, that there is none like him on the earth, a man blameless, true, godly, abstaining from everything evil?
Then the devil answered, and said before the Lord, Does Job worship the Lord for nothing?
Hast thou not made a hedge about him, and about his household, and all his possessions round about? and hast thou not blessed the works of his hands, and multiplied his cattle upon the land?
But put forth thine hand, and touch all that he has: verily he will bless thee to thy face.
Then the Lord said to the devil, Behold, I give into thine hand all that he has, but touch not himself. So the devil went out from the presence of the Lord.
And it came to pass on a certain day, that Job's sons and his daughters were drinking wine in the house of their elder brother.
And, behold, there came a messenger to Job, and said to him, The yokes of oxen were ploughing, and the she-asses were feeding near them;
and the spoilers came and took them for a prey, and slew the servants with the sword; and I having escaped alone am come to tell thee.
While he was yet speaking, there came another messenger, and said to Job, Fire has fallen from heaven, and burnt up the sheep, and devoured the shepherds like wise; and I having escaped alone am come to tell thee.
While he was yet speaking, there came another messenger, and said to Job, The horsemen formed three companies against us, and surrounded the camels, and took them for a prey, and slew the servants with the sword; and I only escaped, and am come to tell thee.
While he is yet speaking, another messenger comes, saying to Job, While thy sons and thy daughters were eating and drinking with their elder brother,
suddenly a great wind came on from the desert, and caught the four corners of the house, and the house fell upon thy children, and they are dead; and I have escaped alone, and am come to tell thee.
So Job arose, and rent his garments, and shaved the hair of his head, and fell on the earth, and worshipped,
and said, I myself came forth naked from my mother's womb, and naked shall I return thither; the Lord gave, the Lord has taken away: as it seemed good to the Lord, so has it come to pass; blessed be the name of the Lord.
And the child Samuel ministered to the Lord before Heli the priest: and the word of the Lord was precious in those days, there was no distinct vision.
And it came to pass at that time that Heli was sleeping in his place; and his eyes began to fail, and could not see.
And the lamp of God was burning before it was trimmed, and Samuel slept in the temple, where was the ark of God.
And the Lord called, Samuel, Samuel; and he said, Behold, here am I.
And he ran to Heli, and said, Here am I, for thou didst call me: and he said, I did not call thee; return, go to sleep; and he returned and went to sleep.
And the Lord called again, Samuel, Samuel: and he went to Heli the second time, and said, Behold here am I, for thou didst call me: and he said, I called thee not; return, go to sleep.
And it was before Samuel knew the Lord, and before the word of the Lord was revealed to him.
And the Lord called Samuel again for the third time: and he arose and went to Heli, and said, Behold, I am here, for thou didst call me: and Heli perceived that the Lord had called the child.
And he said, Return, child, go to sleep; and it shall come to pass if he shall call thee, that thou shalt say, Speak for thy servant hears: and Samuel went and lay down in his place.
And the Lord came, and stood, and called him as before: and Samuel said, Speak, for thy servant hears.
And the Lord said to Samuel, Behold, I execute my words in Israel; whoever hears them, both his ears shall tingle.
In that day I will raise up against Heli all things that I have said against his house; I will begin, and I will make an end.
And I have told him that I will be avenged on his house perpetually for the iniquities of his sons, because his sons spoke evil against God, and he did not admonish them.
And it shall not go on so; I have sworn to the house of Eli, the iniquity of the house of Eli shall not be atoned for with incense or sacrifices for ever.
And Samuel slept till morning, and rose early in the morning, and opened the doors of the house of the Lord; and Samuel feared to tell Heli the vision.
And Heli said to Samuel, Samuel, my son; and he said, Behold, here am I.
And he said, What was the word that was spoken to thee? I pray thee hide it not from me: may God do these things to thee, and more also, if thou hide from me any thing of all the words that were spoken to thee in thine ears.
And Samuel reported all the words, and hid them not from him. And Heli said, He is the Lord, he shall do that which is good in his sight.
And Samuel grew, and the Lord was with him, and there did not fall one of his words to the ground.
And all Israel knew from Dan even to Bersabee, that Samuel was faithful as a prophet to the Lord.
And the Lord manifested himself again in Selom, for the Lord revealed himself to Samuel; and Samuel was accredited to all Israel as a prophet to the Lord from one end of the land to the other: and Heli was very old, and his sons kept advancing in wickedness, and their way was evil before the Lord.
And the Lord spoke all these words, saying:
I am the Lord thy God, who brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.
Thou shalt have no other gods beside me.
Thou shalt not make to thyself an idol, nor likeness of anything, whatever things are in the heaven above, and whatever are in the earth beneath, and whatever are in the waters under the earth.
Thou shalt not bow down to them, nor serve them; for I am the Lord thy God, a jealous God, recompensing the sins of the fathers upon the children, to the third and fourth generation to them that hate me,
and bestowing mercy on them that love me to thousands of them, and on them that keep my commandments.
Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord thy God will not acquit him that takes his name in vain.
Remember the sabbath day to keep it holy.
Six days thou shalt labour, and shalt perform all thy work.
But on the seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord thy God; on it thou shalt do no work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy servant nor thy maidservant, thine ox nor thine ass, nor any cattle of thine, nor the stranger that sojourns with thee.
For in six days the Lord made the heaven and the earth, and the sea and all things in them, and rested on the seventh day; therefore the Lord blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it.
Honour thy father and thy mother, that it may be well with thee, and that thou mayest live long on the good land, which the Lord thy God gives to thee.
Thou shalt not commit adultery.
Thou shalt not steal.
Thou shalt not kill.
Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour.
O Lord, rebuke me not in thy wrath, neither chasten me in thine anger.
Pity me, O Lord; for I am weak: heal me, O Lord; for my bones are vexed.
My soul also is grievously vexed: but thou, O Lord, how long?
Return, O Lord, deliver my soul: save me for thy mercy's sake.
For in death no man remembers thee: and who will give thee thanks in Hades?
I am wearied with my groaning; I shall wash my bed every night; I shall water my couch with tears.
Mine eye is troubled because of my wrath; I am worn out because of all my enemies.
Depart from me, all ye that work iniquity; for the Lord has heard the voice of my weeping.
The Lord has hearkened to my petition; the Lord has accepted my prayer.
Let all mine enemies be put to shame and sore troubled: let them be turned back and grievously put to shame speedily.
Blessed be the Lord my God, who instructs my hands for battle, and my fingers for war.
My mercy, and my refuge; my helper, and my deliverer; my protector, in whom I have trusted; who subdues my people under me.
Lord, what is man, that thou art made known to him? or the son of man, that thou takest account of him?
Man is like to vanity: his days pass as a shadow.
O Lord, bow thy heavens, and come down: touch the mountains, and they shall smoke.
Send lightning, and thou shalt scatter them: send forth thine arrows, and thou shalt discomfit them.
Send forth thine hand from on high; rescue me, and deliver me out of great waters, out of the hand of strange children;
whose mouth has spoken vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of iniquity.
O God, I will sing a new song to thee: I will play to thee on a psaltery of ten strings.
Even to him who gives salvation to kings: who redeems his servant David from the hurtful sword.
Deliver me, and rescue me from the hand of strange children, whose mouth has spoken vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of iniquity;
whose children are as plants, strengthened in their youth: their daughters are beautiful, sumptuously adorned after the similitude of a temple.
Their garners are full, and bursting with one kind of store after another; their sheep are prolific, multiplying in their streets.
Their oxen are fat: there is no falling down of a hedge, nor going out, nor cry in their folds.
Men bless the people to whom this lot belongs, but blessed is the people whose God is the Lord.
And the borders of the tribe of Juda according to their families were from the borders of Idumea from the wilderness of sin, as far as Cades southward.
And their borders were from the south as far as a part of the salt sea from the high country that extends southward.
And they proceed before the ascent of Acrabin, and go out round Sena, and go up from the south to Cades Barne; and go out to Asoron, and proceed up to Sarada, and go out by the way that is west of Cades.
And they go out to Selmona, and issue at the valley of Egypt; and the termination of its boundaries shall be at the sea: these are their boundaries southward.
And their boundaries eastward are all the salt sea as far as Jordan; and their borders from the north, and from the border of the sea, and from part of Jordan
the borders go up to Baethaglaam, and they go along from the north to Baetharaba, and the borders go on up to the stone of Baeon the son of Ruben.
And the borders continue on to the fourth part of the valley of Achor, and go down to Galgal, which is before the approach of Adammin, which is southward in the valley, and terminate at the water of the fountain of the sun; and their going forth shall be the fountain of Rogel.
And the borders go up to the valley of Ennom, behind Jebus southward; this is Jerusalem: and the borders terminate at the top of the mountain, which is before the valley of Ennom toward the sea, which is by the side of the land of Raphain northward.
And the border going forth from the top of the mountain terminates at the fountain of the water of Naphtho, and terminates at mount Ephron; and the border will lead to Baal; this is the city of Jarim.
And the border will go round from Baal to the sea, and will go on to the mount of Assar behind the city of Jarin northwards; this is Chaslon: and it will come down to the city of Sun, and will go on to the south.
And the border terminates behind Accaron northward, and the borders will terminate at Socchoth, and the borders will go on to the south, and will terminate at Lebna, and the issue of the borders will be at the sea; and their borders shall be toward the sea, the great sea shall be the boundary.
These are the borders of the children of Juda round about according to their families.
And to Chaleb the son of Jephone he gave a portion in the midst of the children of Juda by the command of God; and Joshua gave him the city of Arboc the metropolis of Enac; this is Chebron.
And Chaleb the son of Jephone destroyed thence the three sons of Enac, Susi, and Tholami, and Achima.
And Chaleb went up thence to the inhabitants of Dabir; and the name of Dabir before was the city of Letters.
And Chaleb said, Whosoever shall take and destroy the city of Letters, and master it, to him will I give my daughter Ascha to wife.
And Gothoniel the son of Chenez the brother of Chaleb took it; and he gave him Ascha his daughter to wife.
And it came to pass as she went out that she counselled him, saying, I will ask of my father a field; and she cried from off her ass; and Chaleb said to her, What is it?
And she said to him, Give me a blessing, for thou hast set me in the land of Nageb; give me Botthanis: and he gave her Gonaethla the upper, and Gonaethla the lower.
This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Juda.
And their cities were cities belonging to the tribe of the children of Juda on the borders of Edom by the wilderness, and Baeseleel, and Ara, and Asor,
and Icam, and Regma, and Aruel,
and Cades, and Asorionain, and Maenam,
and Balmaenan, and their villages,
and the cities of Aseron, this is Asor,
and Sen, and Salmaa, and Molada,
and Seri, and Baephalath,
and Cholaseola, and Beersabee; and their villages, and their hamlets,
Bala and Bacoc, and Asom,
and Elboudad, and Baethel, and Herma,
and Sekelac, and Macharim, and Sethennac,
and Labos, and Sale, and Eromoth; twenty-nine cities, and their villages.
In the plain country Astaol, and Raa, and Assa,
and Ramen, and Tano, and Iluthoth, and Maeani,
and Jermuth, and Odollam, and Membra, and Saocho, and Jazeca.
And Sacarim and Gadera, and its villages; fourteen cities, and their villages;
Senna, and Adasan, and Magadalgad,
and Dalad, and Maspha, and Jachareel,
and Basedoth, and Ideadalea;
and Chabra, and Maches, and Maachos,
and Geddor, and Bagadiel, and Noman, and Machedan: sixteen cities, and their villages;
Lebna, and Ithac, and Anoch,
and Jana, and Nasib,
and Keilam, and Akiezi, and Kezib, and Bathesar, and Aelom: ten cities, and their villages;
Accaron and her villages, and their hamlets:
from Accaron, Gemna, and all the cities that are near Asedoth; and their villages.
Asiedoth, and her villages, and her hamlets; Gaza, and its villages and its hamlets as far as the river of Egypt, and the great sea is the boundary.
And in the hill country Samir, and Jether, and Socha,
and Renna and the city of Letters, this is Dabir;
and Anon, and Es, and Man, and Aesam,
and Gosom, and Chalu, and Channa, and Gelom: eleven cities, and their villages;
Aerem, and Remna, and Soma,
and Jemain, and Baethachu, and Phacua,
and Euma, and the city Arboc, this is Chebron, and Soraith: nine cities and their villages:
Maor, and Chermel, and Ozib, and Itan,
and Jariel, and Aricam, and Zacanaim,
and Gabaa, and Thamnatha; nine cities, and their villages;
Aelua, and Bethsur, and Geddon,
and Magaroth, and Baethanam, and Thecum; six cities, and their villages; Theco, and Ephratha, this is Baethleem, and Phagor, and Aetan, and Culon, and Tatam, and Thobes, and Carem, and Galem, and Thether, and Manocho: eleven cities, and their villages,
Cariathbaal, this is the city of Jarim, and Sotheba: two cities, and their villages:
and Baddargeis, and Tharabaam, and Aenon;
and Aeochioza, and Naphlazon, and the cities of Sadon, and Ancades; seven cities, and their villages.
And the Jebusite dwelt in Jerusalem, and the children of Juda could not destroy them; and the Jebusites dwelt in Jerusalem to this day.
My kinsman is gone down to his garden, to the beds of spice, to feed his flock in the gardens, and to gather lilies.
I am my kinsman's, and my kinsman is mine, who feeds among the lilies.
Thou art fair, my companion, as Pleasure, beautiful as Jerusalem, terrible as armies set in array.
Turn away thine eyes from before me, for they have ravished me: thy hair is as flocks of goats which have appeared from Galaad.
Thy teeth are as flocks of shorn sheep, that have gone up from the washing, all of them bearing twins, and there is none barren among them: thy lips are as a thread of scarlet, and thy speech is comely.
Thy cheek is like the rind of a pomegranate, being seen without thy veil.
There are sixty queens, and eighty concubines, and maidens without number.
My dove, my perfect one is one; she is the only one of her mother; she is the choice of her that bore her. The daughters saw her, and the queens will pronounce her blessed, yea, and the concubines, and they will praise her.
Who is this that looks forth as the morning, fair as the moon, choice as the sun, terrible as armies set in array?
I went down to the garden of nuts, to look at the fruits of the valley, to see if the vine flowered, if the pomegranates blossomed.
There I will give thee my breasts: my soul knew it not: it made me as the chariots of Aminadab.
Return, return, O Sunamite; return, return, and we will look at thee. What will ye see in the Sunamite? She comes as bands of armies.
Why dost thou, O mighty man, boast of iniquity in thy mischief? All the day
thy tongue has devised unrighteousness; like a sharpened razor thou hast wrought deceit.
Thou hast loved wickedness more than goodness; unrighteousness better than to speak righteousness. Pause.
Thou has loved all words of destruction, and a deceitful tongue.
Therefore may God destroy thee for ever, may he pluck thee up and utterly remove thee from thy dwelling, and thy root from the land of the living. Pause.
And the righteous shall see, and fear, and shall laugh at him, and say,
Behold the man who made not God his help; but trusted in the abundance of his wealth, and strengthened himself in his vanity.
But I am as a fruitful olive in the house of God: I have trusted in the mercy of God for ever, even for evermore.
I will give thanks to thee for ever, for thou hast done it: and I will wait on thy name; for it is good before the saints.
THE VISION OF THE DESERT. As though a whirlwind should pass through the desert, coming from a desert, even from such a land,
so a fearful and a grievous vision was declared to me: he that is treacherous deals treacherously, the transgressor transgresses. The Elamites are upon me, and the ambassadors of the Persians come against me: now will I groan and comfort myself.
Therefore are my loins filled with feebleness, and pangs have seized me as a travailing woman: I dealt wrongfully that I might not hear; I hasted that I might not see.
My heart wanders, and transgression overwhelms me; my soul is occupied with fear.
Prepare the table, eat, drink: arise, ye princes, and prepare your shields.
For thus said the Lord to me, Go and station a watchman for thyself, and declare whatever thou shalt see.
And I saw two mounted horsemen, and a rider on an ass, and a rider on a camel.
Hearken with great attention, and call thou Urias to the watch-tower: the Lord has spoken. I stood continually during the day, and I stood in the camp all night:
and, behold, he comes riding in a chariot and pair: and he answered and said, Babylon is fallen, is fallen; and all her images and her idols have been crushed to the ground.
Hear, ye that are left, and ye that are in pain, hear what things I have heard of the Lord of hosts which the God of Israel has declared to us. THE VISION OF IDUMEA.
Call to me out of Seir; guard ye the bulwarks.
I watch in the morning and the night: if thou wouldest enquire, enquire, and dwell by me.
Thou mayest lodge in the forest in the evening, or in the way of Daedan.
Ye that dwell in the country of Thaeman, bring water to meet him that is thirsty;
meet the fugitives with bread, because of the multitude of the slain, and because of the multitude of them that lose their way, and because of the multitude of swords, and because of the multitude of bent bows, and because of the multitude of them that have fallen in war.
For thus said the Lord to me, Yet a year, as the year of an hireling, and the glory of the sons of Kedar shall fail:
and the remnant of the strong bows of the sons of Kedar shall be small: for the Lord God of Israel has spoken it.
Not to us, O Lord, not to us, but to thy name give glory, because of thy mercy and thy truth;
lest at any time the nations should say, Where is their God?
But our God has done in heaven and on earth, whatsoever he has pleased.
The idols of the nations are silver and gold, the works of men's hands.
They have a mouth, but they cannot speak; they have eyes, but they cannot see:
they have ears, but they cannot hear; they have noses, but they cannot smell;
they have hands, but they cannot handle; they have feet, but they cannot walk: they cannot speak through their throat.
Let those that make them become like to them, and all who trust in them.
The house of Israel trusts in the Lord: he is their helper and defender.
And Joshua rose up early in the morning, and departed from Sattin; and they came as far as Jordan, and lodged there before they crossed over.
And it came to pass after three days, that the scribes went through the camp;
and they charged the people, saying, When ye shall see the ark of the covenant of the Lord our God, and our priests and the Levites bearing it, ye shall depart from your places, and ye shall go after it.
But let there be a distance between you and it; ye shall stand as much as two thousand cubits from it. Do not draw nigh to it, that ye may know the way which ye are to go; for ye have not gone the way before.
And Joshua said to the people, Sanctify yourselves against to-morrow, for to-morrow the Lord will do wonders among you.
And Joshua said to the priests, Take up the ark of the covenant of the Lord, and go before the people: and the priests took up the ark of the covenant of the Lord, and went before the people.
And the Lord said to Joshua, This day do I begin to exalt thee before all the children of Israel, that they may know that as I was with Moses, so will I also be with thee.
And now charge the priests that bear the ark of the covenant, saying, As soon as ye shall enter on a part of the water of Jordan, then ye shall stand in Jordan.
And Joshua said to the children of Israel, Come hither, and hearken to the word of the Lord our God.
Hereby ye shall know that the living God is among you, and will utterly destroy from before our face the Chananite, and the Chettite and Pherezite, and the Evite, and the Amorite, and the Gergesite, and the Jebusite.
Behold, the ark of the covenant of the Lord of all the earth passes over Jordan.
Choose for yourselves twelve men of the sons of Israel, one of each tribe.
And it shall come to pass, when the feet of the priests that bear the ark of the covenant of the Lord of the whole earth rest in the water of Jordan, the water of Jordan below shall fail, and the water coming down from above shall stop.
And the people removed from their tents to cross over Jordan, and the priests bore the ark of the covenant of the Lord before the people.
And when the priests that bore the ark of the covenant of the Lord entered upon Jordan, and the feet of the priests that bore the ark of the covenant of the Lord were dipped in part of the water of Jordan; (now Jordan overflowed all its banks about the time of wheat harvest:)
then the waters that came down from above stopped; there stood one solid heap very far off, as far as the region of Kariathiarim, and the lower part came down to the sea of Araba, the salt sea, till it completely failed; and the people stood opposite Jericho.
And there was a transgressor so called there, and his name was Sabee, a Benjamite, the son of Bochori: and he blew the trumpet, and said, We have no portion in David, neither have we any inheritance in the son of Jessae: to thy tents, O Israel, every one.
And all the men of Israel went up from following David after Sabee the son of Bochori: but the men of Juda adhered to their king, from Jordan even to Jerusalem.
And David went into his house at Jerusalem: and the king took the ten women his concubines, whom he had left to keep the house, and he put them in a place of custody, and maintained them, and went not in to them; and they were kept living as widows, till the day of their death.
And the king said to Amessai, Call to me the men of Juda for three days, and do thou be present here.
And Amessai went to call Juda, and delayed beyond the time which David appointed him.
And David said to Amessai, Now shall Sabee the son of Bochori do us more harm than Abessalom: now then take thou with thee the servants of thy lord, and follow after him, lest he find for himself strong cities, so will he blind our eyes.
And there went out after him Amessai and the men of Joab, and the Cherethites, and the Phelethites, and all the mighty men: and they went out from Jerusalem to pursue after Sabee the son of Bochori.
And they were by the great stone that is in Gabaon: and Amessai went in before them: and Joab had upon him a military cloak over his apparel, and over it he was girded with a dagger fastened upon his loins in its scabbard: and the dagger came out, it even came out and fell.
And Joab said to Amessai, Art thou in health, my brother? and the right hand of Joab took hold of the beard of Amessai to kiss him.
And Amessai observed not the dagger that was in the hand of Joab: and Joab smote him with it on the loins, and his bowels were shed out upon the ground, and he did not repeat the blow, and he died: and Joab and Abessai his brother pursued after Sabee the son of Bochori.
And there stood over him one of the servants of Joab, and said, Who is he that is for Joab, and who is on the side of David following Joab?
And Amessai was weltering in blood in the midst of the way. And a man saw that all the people stood still; and he removed Amessai out of the path into a field, and he cast a garment upon him, because he saw every one that came to him standing still.
And when he was quickly removed from the road, every man of Israel passed after Joab to pursue after Sabee the son of Bochori.
And he went through all the tribes of Israel to Abel, and to Bethmacha; and all in Charri too were assembled, and followed after him.
And they came and besieged him in Abel and Phermacha: and they raised a mound against the city and it stood close to the wall; and all the people with Joab proposed to throw down the wall.
And a wise woman cried from the wall, and said, Hear, hear; say, I pray ye, to Joab, Draw near hither, and I will speak to him.
And he drew nigh to her, and the woman said to him, Art thou Joab? and he said, I am. And she said to him, Hear the words of thy handmaid; and Joab said, I do hear.
And she spoke, saying, Of old time they said thus, Surely one was asked in Abel, and Dan, whether the faithful in Israel failed in what they purposed; they will surely ask in Abel, even in like manner, whether they have failed.
I am a peaceable one of the strong ones in Israel; but thou seekest to destroy a city and a mother city in Israel: why dost thou seek to ruin the inheritance of the Lord?
And Joab answered and said, Far be it, far be it from me, that I should ruin or destroy.
Is not the case thus, that a man of mount Ephraim, Sabee, son of Bochori by name, has even lifted up his hand against king David? Give him only to me, and I will depart from the city. And the woman said to Joab, Behold, his head shall be thrown to thee over the wall.
And the woman went in to all the people, and she spoke to all the city in her wisdom; and they took off the head of Sabee the son of Bochori; and took it away and threw it to Joab: and he blew the trumpet, and the people separated from the city away from him, every man to his tent: and Joab returned to Jerusalem to the king.
And Joab was over all the forces of Israel: and Banaias the son of Jodae was over the Cherethites and over the Phelethites.
And Adoniram was over the tribute: and Josaphath the son of Achiluth was recorder.
And Susa was scribe: and Sadoc and Abiathar were priests.
Moreover Iras the son of Iarin was priest to David.
And hide them together in the earth; and fill their faces with shame.
Then will I confess that thy right hand can save thee.
But now look at the wild beasts with thee; they eat grass like oxen.
Behold now, his strength is in his loins, and his force is in the navel of his belly.
He sets up his tail like a cypress; and his nerves are wrapped together.
His sides are sides of brass; and his backbone is as cast iron.
This is the chief of the creation of the Lord; made to be played with by his angels.
And when he has gone up to a steep mountain, he causes joy to the quadrupeds in the deep.
He lies under trees of every kind, by the papyrus, and reed, and bulrush.
And the great trees make a shadow over him with their branches, and so do the bushes of the field.
If there should be a flood, he will not perceive it; he trust that Jordan will rush up into his mouth.
But wilt thou catch the serpent with a hook, and put a halter about his nose?
Or wilt thou fasten a ring in his nostril, and bore his lip with a clasp?
Will he address thee with a petition? softly, with the voice of a suppliant?
And will he make a covenant with thee? and wilt thou take him for a perpetual servant?
And wilt thou play with him as with a bird? or bind him as a sparrow for a child?
And do the nations feed upon him, and the nations of the Phoenicians share him?
And all the ships come together would not be able to bear the mere skin of his tail; neither shall they carry his head in fishing-vessels.
But thou shalt lay thy hand upon him once, remembering the war that is waged by his mouth; and let it not be done any more.
Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised in the city of our God, in his holy mountain.
The city of the great King is well planted on the mountains of Sion, with the joy of the whole earth, on the sides of the north.
God is known in her palaces, when he undertakes to help her.
For, behold the kings of the earth were assembled, they came together.
They saw, and so they wondered: they were troubled, they were moved.
Trembling took hold on them: there were the pangs as of a woman in travail.
Thou wilt break the ships of Tharsis with a vehement wind.
As we have heard, so have we also seen, in the city of the Lord of hosts, in the city of our God: God has founded it for ever. Pause.
We have thought of thy mercy, O God, in the midst of thy people.
According to thy name, O God, so is also thy praise to the ends of the earth: thy right hand is full of righteousness.
Let mount Sion rejoice, let the daughters of Judaea exult, because of thy judgments, O Lord.
Go round about Sion, and encompass her: tell ye her towers.
Mark ye well her strength, and observe her palaces; that ye may tell the next generation.
For this is our God for ever and ever: he will be our guide for evermore.
Bless the Lord, O my soul; and all that is within me, bless his holy name.
Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his praises:
who forgives all thy transgressions, who heals all thy diseases;
who redeems thy life from corruption; who crowns thee with mercy and compassion;
who satisfies thy desire with good things: so that thy youth shall be renewed like that of the eagle.
The Lord executes mercy and judgment for all that are injured.
He made known his ways to Moses, his will to the children of Israel.
The Lord is compassionate and pitiful, long-suffering, and full of mercy.
He will not be always angry; neither will he be wrathful for ever.
He has not dealt with us according to our sins, nor recompensed us according to our iniquities.
For as the heaven is high above the earth, the Lord has so increased his mercy toward them that fear him.
As far as the east is from the west, so far has he removed our transgressions from us.
As a father pities his children, the Lord pities them that fear him.
For he knows our frame: remember that we are dust.
As for man, his days are as grass; as a flower of the field, so shall he flourish.
For the wind passes over it, and it shall not be; and it shall know its place no more.
But the mercy of the Lord is from generation to generation upon them that fear him, and his righteousness to children's children;
to them that keep his covenant, and remember his commandments to do them.
The Lord has prepared his throne in the heaven; and his kingdom rules over all.
Bless the Lord, all ye his angels, mighty in strength, who perform his bidding, ready to hearken to the voice of his words.
Bless the Lord, all ye his hosts; ye ministers of his that do his will.
Bless the Lord, all his works, in every place of his dominion: bless the Lord, O my soul.
And it came to pass, when king Ezekias heard it, that he rent his clothes, and put on sackcloth, and went up to the house of the Lord.
And he sent Heliakim the steward, and Somnas the scribe, and the elders of the priests clothed with sackcloth, to Esaias the son of Amos, the prophet. And they said to him, Thus says Ezekias,
To-day is a day of affliction, and reproach, and rebuke, and anger: for the pangs are come upon the travailing woman, but she has not strength to bring forth.
May the Lord thy God hear the words of Rabsaces, which the king of the Assyrians has sent, to reproach the living God, even to reproach with the words which the Lord thy God has heard: therefore thou shalt pray to thy Lord for these that are left.
So the servants of king Ezekias came to Esaias.
And Esaias said to them, Thus shall ye say to your master, Thus saith the Lord, Be not thou afraid at the words which thou hast heard, wherewith the ambassadors of the king of the Assyrians have reproached me,
Behold, I will send a blast upon him, and he shall hear a report, and return to his own country, and he shall fall by the sword in his own land.
So Rabsaces returned, and found the king of the Assyrians besieging Lobna: for he had heard that he had departed from Lachis.
And Tharaca king of the Ethiopians went forth to attack him. And when he heard it, he turned aside, and sent messengers to Ezekias, saying,
Thus shall ye say to Ezekias king of Judea, Let not thy God, in whom thou trustest, deceive thee, saying, Jerusalem shall not be delivered into the hand of the king of the Assyrians.
Hast thou not heard what the kings of the Assyrians have done, how they have destroyed the whole earth? and shalt thou be delivered?
Have the gods of the nations which my fathers destroyed delivered them, both Gozan, and Charrhan, and Rapheth, which are in the land of Theemath?
Where are the kings of Emath? and where is the king of Arphath? and where is the king of the city of Eppharuaim, and of Anagugana?
And Ezekias received the letter from the messengers, and read it, and went up to the house of the Lord, and opened it before the Lord.
And Ezekias prayed to the Lord, saying,
O Lord of hosts, God of Israel, who sittest upon the cherubs, thou alone art the God of every kingdom of the world: thou hast made heaven and earth.
Incline thine ear, O Lord, hearken, O Lord; open thine eyes, O Lord, look, O Lord: and behold the words of Sennacherim, which he has sent to reproach the living God.
For of a truth, Lord, the kings of the Assyrians have laid waste the whole world, and the countries thereof,
and have cast their idols into the fire: for, they were no gods, but the work of men's hands, wood and stone; and they have cast them away.
But now, O Lord our God, deliver us from his hands, that every kingdom of the earth may know that thou art God alone.
And Esaias the son of Amos was sent to Ezekias, and said to him, Thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel, I have heard thy prayer to me concerning Sennacherim king of the Assyrians.
This is the word which God has spoken concerning him; The virgin daughter of Sion has despised thee, and mocked thee; the daughter of Jerusalem has shaken her head at thee.
Whom hast thou reproached and provoked? and against whom hast thou lifted up thy voice? and hast thou not lifted up thine eyes on high against the Holy One of Israel?
For thou hast reproached the Lord by messengers; for thou hast said, With the multitude of chariots have I ascended to the height of mountains, and to the sides of Libanus; and I have cropped the height of his cedars and the beauty of his cypresses; and I entered into the height of the forest region:
and I have made a bridge, and dried up the waters, and every pool of water.
Hast thou not heard of these things which I did of old? I appointed them from ancient times; but now have I manifested my purpose of desolating nations in their strong holds, and them that dwell in strong cities.
I weakened their hands, and they withered; and they became as dry grass on the house-tops, and as grass.
But now I know thy rest, and thy going out, and thy coming in.
And thy wrath wherewith thou hast been enraged, and thy rancour has come up to me; therefore I will put a hook in thy nose, and a bit in thy lips, and will turn thee back by the way by which thou camest.
And this shall be a sign to thee, Eat this year what thou hast sown; and the second year that which is left: and the third year sow, and reap, and plant vineyards, and eat the fruit of them.
And they that are left in Judea shall take root downward, and bear fruit upward:
for out of Jerusalem there shall be a remnant, and the saved ones out of mount Sion: the zeal of the Lord of hosts shall perform this.
Therefore thus saith the Lord concerning the king of the Assyrians, He shall not enter into this city, nor cast a weapon against it, nor bring a shield against it, nor make a rampart round it.
But by the way by which he came, by it shall he return, and shall not enter into this city: thus saith the Lord.
I will protect this city to save it for my own sake, and for my servant David's sake.
And the angel of the Lord went forth, and slew out of the camp of the Assyrians a hundred and eighty-five thousand: and they arose in the morning and found all these bodies dead.
And Sennacherim king of the Assyrians turned and departed, and dwelt in Nineve.
And while he was worshipping Nasarach his country's god in the house, Adramelech and Sarasar his sons smote him with swords; and they escaped into Armenia: and Asordan his son reigned in his stead.
And these are the words of the book, which Baruch the son of Nerias, the son of Maasias, the son of Sedecias, the son of Asadias, the son of Chelcias, wrote in Babylon,
In the fifth year, and in the seventh day of the month, what time as the Chaldeans took Jerusalem, and burnt it with fire.
And Baruch did read the words of this book in the hearing of Jechonias the son of Joachim king of Juda, and in the ears of all the people that came to hear the book,
And in the hearing of the nobles, and of the king's sons, and in the hearing of the elders, and of all the people, from the lowest unto the highest, even of all them that dwelt at Babylon by the river Sud.
Whereupon they wept, fasted, and prayed before the Lord.
They made also a collection of money according to every man's power:
And they sent it to Jerusalem unto Joachim the high priest, the son of Chelcias, son of Salom, and to the priests, and to all the people which were found with him at Jerusalem,
At the same time when he received the vessels of the house of the Lord, that were carried out of the temple, to return them into the land of Juda, the tenth day of the month Sivan, namely, silver vessels, which Sedecias the son of Josias king of Jada had made,
After that Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon had carried away Jechonias, and the princes, and the captives, and the mighty men, and the people of the land, from Jerusalem, and brought them unto Babylon.
And they said, Behold, we have sent you money to buy you burnt offerings, and sin offerings, and incense, and prepare ye manna, and offer upon the altar of the Lord our God;
And pray for the life of Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon, and for the life of Balthasar his son, that their days may be upon earth as the days of heaven:
And the Lord will give us strength, and lighten our eyes, and we shall live under the shadow of Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon, and under the shadow of Balthasar his son, and we shall serve them many days, and find favour in their sight.
Pray for us also unto the Lord our God, for we have sinned against the Lord our God; and unto this day the fury of the Lord and his wrath is not turned from us.
And ye shall read this book which we have sent unto you, to make confession in the house of the Lord, upon the feasts and solemn days.
And ye shall say, To the Lord our God belongeth righteousness, but unto us the confusion of faces, as it is come to pass this day, unto them of Juda, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
And to our kings, and to our princes, and to our priests, and to our prophets, and to our fathers:
For we have sinned before the Lord,
And disobeyed him, and have not hearkened unto the voice of the Lord our God, to walk in the commandments that he gave us openly:
Since the day that the Lord brought our forefathers out of the land of Egypt, unto this present day, we have been disobedient unto the Lord our God, and we have been negligent in not hearing his voice.
Wherefore the evils cleaved unto us, and the curse, which the Lord appointed by Moses his servant at the time that he brought our fathers out of the land of Egypt, to give us a land that floweth with milk and honey, like as it is to see this day.
Nevertheless we have not hearkened unto the voice of the Lord our God, according unto all the words of the prophets, whom he sent unto us:
But every man followed the imagination of his own wicked heart, to serve strange gods, and to do evil in the sight of the Lord our God.
And he was attached to the soul of Dina the daughter of Jacob, and he loved the damsel, and he spoke kindly to the damsel.
Sychem spoke to Emmor his father, saying, Take for me this damsel to wife.
And Jacob heard that the son of Emmor had defiled Dina his daughter (now his sons were with his cattle in the plain). And Jacob was silent until they came.
And Emmor the father of Sychem went forth to Jacob, to speak to him.
and intermarry with us. Give us your daughters, and take our daughters for your sons.
And dwell in the midst of us; and, behold, the land is spacious before you, dwell in it, and trade, and get possessions in it.
And Sychem said to her father and to her brothers, I would find grace before you, and we will give whatever ye shall name.
And all that went in at the gate of their city hearkened to Emmor and Sychem his son, and they were circumcised in the flesh of their foreskin every male.
And it came to pass on the third day, when they were in pain, the two sons of Jacob, Symeon and Levi, Dina's brethren, took each man his sword, and came upon the city securely, and slew every male.
And they slew Emmor and Sychem his son with the edge of the sword, and took Dina out of the house of Sychem, and went forth.
And Jacob said to Symeon and Levi, Ye have made me hateful so that I should be evil to all the inhabitants of the land, both among the Chananites and the Pherezites, and I am few in number; they will gather themselves against me and cut me in pieces, and I shall be utterly destroyed, and my house.
And they said, Nay, but shall they treat our sister as an harlot?
And the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying,
Let the children of Israel encamp fronting each other, every man keeping his own rank, according to their standards, according to the houses of their families; the children of Israel shall encamp round about the tabernacle of witness.
And they that encamp first toward the east shall be the order of the camp of Juda with their host, and the prince of the sons of Juda, Naasson the son of Aminadab.
His forces that were numbered, were seventy-four thousand and six hundred.
And they that encamp next shall be of the tribe of Issachar, and the prince of the sons of Issachar shall be Nathanael the son of Sogar.
His forces that were numbered, were fifty-four thousand and four hundred.
And they that encamp next shall be of the tribe of Zabulon, and the prince of the sons of Zabulon shall be Eliab the son of Chaelon.
His forces that were numbered, were fifty-seven thousand and four hundred.
All that were numbered of the camp of Juda were a hundred and eighty thousand and six thousand and four hundred: they shall move first with their forces.
This is the order of the camp of Ruben; their forces shall be toward the south, and the prince of the children of Ruben shall be Elisur the son of Sediur.
His forces that were numbered, were forty-six thousand and five hundred.
And they that encamp next to him shall be of the tribe of Symeon, and the prince of the sons of Symeon shall be Salamiel the son of Surisadai.
His forces that were numbered, were fifty-nine thousand and three hundred.
And they that encamp next to them shall be the tribe of Gad; and the prince of the sons of Gad, Elisaph the son of Raguel.
His forces that were numbered, were forty-five thousand and six hundred and fifty.
All who were numbered of the camp of Ruben, were a hundred and fifty-one thousand and four hundred and fifty: they with their forces shall proceed in the second place.
And then the tabernacle of witness shall be set forward, and the camp of the Levites shall be between the camps; as they shall encamp, so also shall they commence their march, each one next in order to his fellow according to their companies.
The station of the camp of Ephraim shall be westward with their forces, and the head of the children of Ephraim shall be Elisama the son of Emiud.
His forces that were numbered, are forty thousand and five hundred.
And they that encamp next shall be of the tribe of Manasse, and the prince of the sons of Manasse, Gamaliel the son of Phadassur.
His forces that were numbered, were thirty-two thousand and two hundred.
And they that encamp next shall be of the tribe of Benjamin, and the prince of the sons of Benjamin, Abidan the son of Gadeoni.
His forces that were numbered, were thirty-five thousand and four hundred.
All that were numbered of the camp of Ephraim, were one hundred and eight thousand and one hundred: they with their forces shall set out third.
The order of the camp of Dan shall be northward with their forces; and the prince of the sons of Dan, Achiezer the son of Amisadai.
His forces that were numbered, were sixty-two thousand and seven hundred.
And they that encamp next to him shall be the tribe of Aser; and the prince of the sons of Aser, Phagiel the son of Echran.
His forces that were numbered, were forty-one thousand and five hundred.
And they that encamp next shall be of the tribe of Nephthali; and the prince of the children of Nephthali, Achire son Aenan.
His forces that were numbered were fifty-three thousand and four hundred.
All that were numbered of the camp of Dan, were a hundred and fifty-seven thousand and six hundred: they shall set out last according to their order.
This is the numbering of the children of Israel according to the houses of their families: all the numbering of the camps with their forces, was six hundred and three thousand, five hundred and fifty.
But the Levites were not numbered with them, as the Lord commanded Moses.
And the children of Israel did all things that the Lord commanded Moses; thus they encamped in their order, and thus they began their march in succession each according to their divisions, according to the houses of their families.
In the Lord I have put my trust: how will ye say to my soul,
Flee to the mountains as a sparrow?
For behold the sinners have bent their bow, they have prepared their arrows for the quiver, to shoot For privily at the upright in heart.
For they have pulled down what thou didst frame, but what has the righteous done?
The Lord is in his holy temple, as for the Lord, his throne is in heaven: his eyes look upon the poor, his eyelids try the sons of men.
The Lord tries the righteous and the ungodly: and he that loves unrighteousness hates his own soul.
And Samuel said to Saul, The Lord sent me to anoint thee king over Israel: and now hear the voice of the Lord.
Thus said the Lord of hosts, Now will I take vengeance for what Amalec did to Israel, when he met him in the way as he came up out of Egypt.
And now go, and thou shalt smite Amalec and Hierim and all that belongs to him, and thou shalt not save anything of him alive, but thou shalt utterly destroy him: and thou shalt devote him and all his to destruction, and thou shalt spare nothing belonging to him; and thou shalt slay both man and woman, and infant and suckling, and calf and sheep, and camel and ass.
And Saul summoned the people, and he numbered them in Galgala, four hundred thousand regular troops, and Juda thirty thousand regular troops.
And Saul came to the cities of Amalec, and laid wait in the valley.
And Saul said to the Kinite, Go, and depart out of the midst of the Amalekites, lest I put thee with them; for thou dealedst mercifully with the children of Israel when they went up out of Egypt. So the Kinite departed from the midst of Amalec.
And Saul smote Amalec from Evilat to Sur fronting Egypt.
And he took Agag the king of Amalec alive, and he slew all the people and Hierim with the edge of the sword.
And Saul and all the people saved Agag alive, and the best of the flocks, and of the herds, and of the fruits, of the vineyards, and of all the good things; and they would not destroy them: but every worthless and refuse thing they destroyed.
And the word of the Lord came to Samuel, saying,
I have repented that I have made Saul to be king: for he has turned back from following me, and has not kept my word. And Samuel was grieved, and cried to the Lord all night.
And Samuel rose early and went to meet Israel in the morning, and it was told Saul, saying, Samuel has come to Carmel, and he has raised up help for himself: and he turned his chariot, and came down to Galgala to Saul; and, behold, he was offering up a whole-burnt-offering to the Lord, the chief of the spoils which he brought out of Amalec.
And Samuel came to Saul: and Saul said to him, Blessed art thou of the Lord: I have performed all that the Lord said.
And Samuel said, What then is the bleating of this flock in my ears, and the sound of the oxen which I hear?
And Saul said, I have brought them out of Amalec, that which the people preserved, even the best of the sheep, and of the cattle, that it might be sacrificed to the Lord thy God, and the rest have I utterly destroyed.
And Samuel said to Saul, Stay, and I will tell thee what the Lord has said to me this night: and he said to him, Say on.
And Samuel said to Saul, Art thou not little in his eyes, though a leader of one of the tribes of Israel? and yet the Lord anointed thee to be king over Israel.
And the Lord sent thee on a journey, and said to thee, Go, and utterly destroy: thou shalt slay the sinners against me, even the Amalekites; and thou shalt war against them until thou have consumed them.
And why didst not thou hearken to the voice of the Lord, but didst haste to fasten upon the spoils, and didst that which was evil in the sight of the Lord?
And Saul said to Samuel, Because I listened to the voice of the people: yet I went the way by which the Lord sent me, and I brought Agag the king of Amalec, and I destroyed Amalec.
But the people took of the spoils the best flocks and herds out of that which was destroyed, to sacrifice before the Lord our God in Galgal.
And Samuel said, Does the Lord take pleasure in whole-burnt-offerings and sacrifices, as in hearing the words of the Lord? behold, obedience is better than a good sacrifice, and hearkening than the fat of rams.
For sin is as divination; idols bring on pain and grief. Because thou hast rejected the word of the Lord, the Lord also shall reject thee from being king over Israel.
And Saul said to Samuel, I have sinned, in that I have transgressed the word of the Lord and thy direction; for I feared the people, and I hearkened to their voice.
And now remove, I pray thee, my sin, and turn back with me, and I will worship the Lord thy God.
And Samuel said to Saul, I will not turn back with thee, for thou hast rejected the word of the Lord, and the Lord will reject thee from being king over Israel.
And Samuel turned his face to depart, and Saul caught hold of the skirt of his garment, and tore it.
And Samuel said to him, The Lord has rent thy kingdom from Israel out of thy hand this day, and will give it to thy neighbour who is better than thou.
And Israel shall be divided to two: and God will not turn nor repent, for he is not as a man to repent.
And Saul said, I have sinned; yet honour me, I pray thee, before the elders of Israel, and before my people; and turn back with me, and I will worship the Lord thy God.
So Samuel turned back after Saul, and he worshipped the Lord.
And Samuel said, Bring me Agag the king of Amalec: and Agag came to him trembling; and Agag said Is death thus bitter?
And Samuel said to Agag, As thy sword has bereaved women of their children, so shall thy mother be made childless among women: and Samuel slew Agag before the Lord in Galgal.
And Samuel departed to Armathaim, and Saul went up to his house at Gabaa.
And Samuel did not see Saul again till the day of his death, for Samuel mourned after Saul, and the Lord repented that he had made Saul king over Israel.
I perish, carried away by the wind, and I seek for burial, and obtain it not.
Weary I intreat; and what have I done? and strangers have stolen my goods.
Who is this? let him join hands with me.
He shall promise mischief to his companions: but their eyes have failed for their children.
But thou has made me a byword amount the nations, and I am become a scorn to them.
For my eyes are dimmed through pain; I have been grievously beset by all.
Wonder has seized true men upon this; and let the just rise up against the transgressor.
But let the faithful hold on his own way, and let him that is pure of hands take courage.
Howbeit, do ye all strengthen yourselves and come now, for I do not find truth in you.
My days have passed in groaning, and my heart-strings are broken.
For if I remain, Hades is my habitation: and my bed has been made in darkness.
I have called upon death to be my father, and corruption to be my mother and sister.
Where then is yet my hope? or where shall I see my good?
Will they go down with me to Hades, or shall we go down together to the tomb?
Be enlightened, be enlightened, O Jerusalem, for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee.
Behold, darkness shall cover the earth, and there shall be gross darkness on the nations: but the Lord shall appear upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon thee.
And kings shall walk in thy light, and nations in thy brightness.
Lift up thine eyes round about, and behold thy children gathered: all thy sons have come from far, and thy daughters shall be borne on men's shoulders.
Then shalt thou see, and fear, and be amazed in thine heart; for the wealth of the sea shall come round to thee, and of nations and peoples; and herds of camels shall come to thee,
and the camels of Madiam and Gaepha shall cover thee: all from Saba shall come bearing gold, and shall bring frankincense, and they shall publish the salvation of the Lord.
And all the flocks of Kedar shall be gathered, and the rams of Nabaeoth shall come; and acceptable sacrifices shall be offered on my altar, and my house of prayer shall be glorified.
Who are these that fly as clouds, and as doves with young ones to me?
The isles have waited for me, and the ships of Tharsis among the first, to bring thy children from afar, and their silver and their gold with them, and that for the sake of the holy name of the Lord, and because the Holy One of Israel is glorified.
And strangers shall build thy walls, and their kings shall wait upon thee: for by reason of my wrath I smote thee, and by reason of mercy I loved thee.
And thy gates shall be opened continually; they shall not be shut day nor night; to bring in to thee the power of the Gentiles, and their kings as captives.
For the nations and the kings which will not serve thee shall perish; and those nations shall be made utterly desolate.
And the glory of Libanus shall come to thee, with the cypress, and pine, and cedar together, to glorify my holy place.
And the sons of them that afflicted thee, and of them that provoked thee, shall come to thee in fear; and thou shalt be called Sion, the city of the Holy One of Israel.
Because thou has become desolate and hated, and there was no helper, therefore I will make thee a perpetual gladness, a joy of many generations.
And thou shalt suck the milk of the Gentiles, and shalt eat the wealth of kings: and shalt know that I am the Lord that saves thee and delivers thee, the Holy One of Israel.
And for brass I will bring thee gold, and for iron I will bring thee silver, and instead of wood I will bring thee brass, and instead of stones, iron; and I will make thy princes peaceable, and thine overseers righteous.
And injustice shall no more be heard in thy land, nor destruction nor misery in thy coasts; but thy walls shall be called Salvation, and thy gates Sculptured Work.
And thou shalt no more have the sun for a light by day, nor shall the rising of the moon lighten thy night; but the Lord shall be thine everlasting light, and God thy glory.
For the sun shall no more set, nor shall the moon be eclipsed; for the Lord shall be thine everlasting light, and the days of thy mourning shall be completed.
Thy people also shall be all righteous; they shall inherit the land for ever, preserving that which they have planted, even the works of their hands, for glory.
The little one shall become thousands, and the least a great nation; I the Lord will gather them in due time.
And if a woman have an issue of blood many days, not in the time of her separation; if the blood should also flow after her separation, all the days of the issue of her uncleanness shall be as the days of her separation: she shall be unclean.
And every bed on which she shall lie all the days of her flux shall be to her as the bed of her separation, and every seat whereon she shall sit shall be unclean according to the uncleanness of her separation.
Every one that touches it shall be unclean; and he shall wash his garments, and bathe his body in water, and shall be unclean till evening.
But if she shall be cleansed from her flux, then she shall number to herself seven days, and afterwards she shall be esteemed clean.
And on the eighth day she shall take two turtle-doves, or two young pigeons, and shall bring them to the priest, to the door of the tabernacle of witness.
And the priest shall offer one for a sin-offering, and the other for a whole-burnt-offering, and the priest shall make atonement for her before the Lord for her unclean flux.
And ye shall cause the children of Israel to beware of their uncleannesses; so they shall not die for their uncleanness, in polluting my tabernacle that is among them.
This is the law of the man who has an issue, and if one discharge seed of copulation, so that he should be polluted by it.
And this is the law for her that has the issue of blood in her separation, and as to the person who has an issue of seed, in his issue: it is a law for the male and the female, and for the man who shall have lain with her that is set apart.
And the men of Ephraim said to Gedeon, What is this that thou hast done to us, in that thou didst not call us when thou wentest to fight with Madiam? and they chode with him sharply.
And he said to them, What have I now done in comparison of you? is not the gleaning of Ephraim better than the vintage of Abiezer?
The Lord has delivered into your hand the princes of Madiam, Oreb and Zeb; and what could I do in comparison of you? Then was their spirit calmed toward him, when he spoke this word.
And Gedeon came to Jordan, and went over, himself and the three hundred with him, hungry, yet pursuing.
And he said to the men of Socchoth, Give, I pray you, bread to feed this people that follow me; because they are faint, and behold, I am following after Zebee and Salmana, kings of Madiam.
And the princes of Socchoth said, Are the hands of Zebee and Salmana now in thy hand, that we should give bread to thy host?
And Gedeon said, Therefore when the Lord gives Zebee and Salmana into my hand, then will I tear your flesh with the thorns of the wilderness, and the Barkenim.
And he went up thence to Phanuel, and spoke to them likewise: and the men of Phanuel answered him as the men of Socchoth had answered him.
And Gedeon said to the men of Phanuel, When I return in peace, I will break down this tower.
And Zebee and Salmana were in Carcar, and their host was with them, about fifteen thousand, all that were left of all the host of the aliens; and they that fell were a hundred and twenty thousand men that drew the sword.
And he said to Jether his first-born, Rise and slay them; but the lad drew not his sword, for he was afraid, for he was yet very young.
And Zebee and Salmana said, Rise thou and fall upon us, for thy power is as that of a man; and Gedeon arose, and slew Zebee and Salmana: and he took the round ornaments that were on the necks of their camels.
And the men of Israel said to Gedeon, Rule, my lord, over us, both thou, and thy son, and thy son's son; for thou hast saved us out of the hand of Madiam.
And Gedeon said to them, I will not rule, and my son shall not rule among you; the Lord shall rule over you.
And Gedeon said to them, I will make a request of you, and do ye give me every man an earring out of his spoils: for they had golden earrings, for they were Ismaelites.
And they said, We will certainly give them: and he opened his garment, and each man cast therein an earring of his spoils.
And the weight of the golden earrings which he asked, was a thousand and seven hundred pieces of gold, besides the crescents, and the chains, and the garments, and the purple cloths that were on the kings of Madiam, and besides the chains that were on the necks of their camels.
And Gedeon made an ephod of it, an set it in his city in Ephratha; and all Israel went thither a whoring after it, and it became a stumbling-block to Gedeon and his house.
And Moses finished speaking all these words to all the children of Israel;
and said to them, I am this day a hundred and twenty years old; I shall not be able any longer to come in or go out; and the Lord said to me, Thou shalt not go over this Jordan.
The Lord thy God who goes before thee, he shall destroy these nations before thee, and thou shalt inherit them: and it shall be Joshua that goes before thy face, as the Lord has spoken.
And the Lord has delivered them to you; and ye shall do to them, as I charged you.
Be courageous and strong, fear not, neither be cowardly neither be afraid before them; for it is the Lord your God that advances with you in the midst of you, neither will he by any means forsake thee, nor desert thee.
And Moses called Joshua, and said to him before all Israel, Be courageous and strong; for thou shalt go in before this people into the land which the Lord sware to your fathers to give to them, and thou shalt give it to them for an inheritance.
And the Lord that goes with thee shall not forsake thee nor abandon thee; fear not, neither be afraid.
And Moses wrote the words of this law in a book, and gave it to the priests the sons of Levi who bear the ark of the covenant of the Lord, and to the elders of the sons of Israel.
And Moses charged them in that day, saying, After seven years, in the time of the year of release, in the feast of tabernacles,
having assembled the people, the men, and the women, and the children, and the stranger that is in your cities, that they may hear, and that they may learn to fear the Lord your God; and they shall hearken to do all the words of this law.
And their sons who have not known shall hear, and shall learn to fear the Lord thy God all the days that they live upon the land, into which ye go over Jordan to inherit it.
And the Lord said to Moses, Behold, the days of thy death are at hand; call Joshua, and stand ye by the doors of the tabernacle of testimony, and I will give him a charge. And Moses and Joshua went to the tabernacle of testimony, and stood by the doors of the tabernacle of testimony.
And the Lord said to Moses, Behold, thou shalt sleep with thy fathers, and this people will arise and go a whoring after the strange gods of the land, into which they are entering: and they will forsake me, and break my covenant, which I made with them.
And I will be very angry with them in that day, and I will leave them and turn my face away from them, and they shall be devoured; and many evils and afflictions shall come upon them; and they shall say in that day, Because the Lord my God is not with me, these evils have come upon me.
And I will surely turn away my face from them in that day, because of all their evil doings which they have done, because they turned aside after strange gods.
And now write the words of this song, and teach it to the children of Israel, and ye shall put it into their mouth, that this song may witness for me among the children of Israel to their face.
For I will bring them into the good land, which I sware to their fathers, to give to them a land flowing with milk and honey: and they shall eat and be filled and satisfy themselves; then will they turn aside after other gods, and serve them, and they will provoke me, and break my covenant.
And this song shall stand up to witness against them; for they shall not forget it out of their mouth, or out of the mouth of their seed; for I know their wickedness, what they are doing here this day, before I have brought them into the good land, which I sware to their fathers.
And Moses wrote this song in that day, and taught it to the children of Israel.
And he charged Joshua, and said, Be courageous and strong, for thou shalt bring the sons of Israel into the land, which the Lord sware to them, and he shall be with thee.
And when Moses finished writing all the words of this law in a book, even to the end,
then he charged the Levites who bear the ark of the covenant of the Lord, saying,
Take the book of this law, and ye shall put it in the side of the ark of the covenant of the Lord your God; and it shall be there among you for a testimony.
For I know thy provocation, and thy stiff neck; for yet during my life with you at this day, ye have been provoking in your conduct toward God: how shall ye not also be so after my death?
Gather together to me the heads of your tribes, and your elders, and your judges, and your officers, that I may speak in their ears all these words; and I call both heaven and earth to witness against them.
For I know that after my death ye will utterly transgress, and turn aside out of the way which I have commanded you; and evils shall come upon you in the latter days, because ye will do evil before the Lord, to provoke him to anger by the works of your hands. And Moses spoke all the words of this song even to the end, in the ears of the whole assembly.
For I know that after my death ye will utterly transgress, and turn aside out of the way which I have commanded you; and evils shall come upon you in the latter days, because ye will do evil before the Lord, to provoke him to anger by the works of your hands. And Moses spoke all the words of this song even to the end, in the ears of the whole assembly.
O Lord, thou has taken pleasure in thy land: thou hast turned back the captivity of Jacob.
Thou hast forgiven thy people their transgressions; thou has covered all their sins. Pause.
Thou has caused all thy wrath to cease: thou hast turned from thy fierce anger.
Turn us, O God of our salvation, and turn thy anger away from us.
Wouldest thou be angry with us for ever? or wilt thou continue thy wrath from generation to generation?
O God, thou wilt turn and quicken us; and thy people shall rejoice in thee.
Shew us thy mercy, O Lord, and grant us thy salvation.
I will hear what the Lord God will say concerning me: for he shall speak peace to his people, and to his saints, and to those that turn their heart toward him.
Moreover his salvation is near them that fear him; that glory may dwell in our land.
Mercy and truth are met together: righteousness and peace have kissed each other.
Truth has sprung out of the earth; and righteousness has looked down from heaven.
For the Lord will give goodness; and our land shall yield her fruit.
Righteousness shall go before him; and shall set his steps in the way.
The burden of Nineve: the book of the vision of Naum the Elkesite.
God is jealous, and the Lord avenges; the Lord avenges with wrath; the Lord takes vengeance on his adversaries, and he cuts off his enemies.
The Lord is long-suffering, and his power is great, and the Lord will not hold any guiltless: his way is in destruction and in the whirlwind, and the clouds are the dust of his feet.
He threatens the sea, and dries it up, and exhausts all the rivers: the land of Basan, and Carmel are brought low, and the flourishing trees of Libanus have come to nought.
The mountains quake at him, and the hills are shaken, and the earth recoils at his presence, even the world, and all that dwell in it.
Who shall stand before his anger? and who shall withstand in the anger of his wrath? his wrath brings to nought kingdoms, and the rocks are burst asunder by him.
The Lord is good to them that wait on him in the day of affliction; and he knows them that reverence him.
But with an overrunning flood he will make an utter end: darkness shall pursue those that rise up against him and his enemies.
What do ye devise against the Lord? he will make a complete end: he will not take vengeance by affliction twice at the same time.
For the enemy shall be laid bare even to the foundation, and shall be devoured as twisted yew, and as stubble fully dry.
Out of thee shall proceed a device against the Lord, counselling evil things hostile to him.
Thus saith the Lord who rules over many waters, Even thus shall they be sent away, and the report of thee shall not be heard any more.
The Lord created man of the earth, and turned him into it again.
He gave them few days, and a short time, and power also over the things therein.
He endued them with strength by themselves, and made them according to his image,
And put the fear of man upon all flesh, and gave him dominion over beasts and fowls.
Counsel, and a tongue, and eyes, ears, and a heart, gave he them to understand.
Withal he filled them with the knowledge of understanding, and shewed them good and evil.
He set his eye upon their hearts, that he might shew them the greatness of his works.
He gave them to glory in his marvellous acts for ever, that they might declare his works with understanding.
And the elect shall praise his holy name.
Beside this he gave them knowledge, and the law of life for an heritage.
He made an everlasting covenant with them, and shewed them his judgments.
Their eyes saw the majesty of his glory, and their ears heard his glorious voice.
And he said unto them, Beware of all unrighteousness; and he gave every man commandment concerning his neighbour.
Their ways are ever before him, and shall not be hid from his eyes.
For in the division of the nations of the whole earth he set a ruler over every people; but Israel is the Lord's portion:
Therefore all their works are as the sun before him, and his eyes are continually upon their ways.
None of their unrighteous deeds are hid from him, but all their sins are before the Lord
The alms of a man is as a signet with him, and he will keep the good deeds of man as the apple of the eye, and give repentance to his sons and daughters.
Afterwards he will rise up and reward them, and render their recompence upon their heads.
But unto them that repent, he granted them return, and comforted those that failed in patience.
Return unto the Lord, and forsake thy sins, make thy prayer before his face, and offend less.
Turn again to the most High, and turn away from iniquity: for he will lead thee out of darkness into the light of health, and hate thou abomination vehemently.
Who shall praise the most High in the grave, instead of them which live and give thanks?
Thanksgiving perisheth from the dead, as from one that is not: the living and sound in heart shall praise the Lord.
How great is the lovingkindness of the Lord our God, and his compassion unto such as turn unto him in holiness!
For all things cannot be in men, because the son of man is not immortal.
What is brighter than the sun? yet the light thereof faileth; and flesh and blood will imagine evil.
He vieweth the power of the height of heaven; and all men are but earth and ashes.
Before I formed thee in the belly, I knew thee; and before thou camest forth from the womb, I sanctified thee; I appointed thee a prophet to the nations.
And the Lord stretched forth his hand to me, and touched my mouth: and the Lord said to me, Behold, I have put my words into thy mouth.
Behold, I have appointed thee this day over nations and over kingdoms, to root out, and to pull down, and to destroy, and to rebuild, and to plant.
And the word of the Lord came to me, saying, What seest thou? And I said, A rod of an almond tree.
And the Lord said to me, Thou hast well seen: for I have watched over my words to perform them.
And the word of the Lord came to me a second time, saying, What seest thou? And I said, A caldron on the fire; and the face of it is toward the north.
Now it came to pass in the thirtieth year, in the fourth month, on the fifth day of the month, that I was in the midst of the captivity by the river of Chobar; and the heavens were opened, and I saw visions of God.
On the fifth day of the month; this was the fifth year of the captivity of king Joakim.
And the word of the Lord came to Jezekiel the priest, the son of Buzi, in the land of the Chaldeans, by the river of Chobar; and the hand of the Lord was upon me.
And I looked, and, behold, a sweeping wind came from the north, and a great cloud on it, and there was brightness round about it, and gleaming fire, and in the midst of it as it were the appearance of amber in the midst of the fire, and brightness in it.
And in the midst as it were the likeness of four living creatures. And this was their appearance; the likeness of a man was upon them.
And each one had four faces, and each one had four wings.
And their legs were straight; and their feet were winged, and there were sparks, like gleaming brass, and their wings were light.
And the hand of a man was under their wings on their four sides.
And the faces of them four turned not when they went; they went everyone straight forward.
And the likeness of their faces was the face of a man, and the face of a lion on the right of the four; and the face of a calf on the left of the four; and the face of an eagle to the four.
And I looked, and, behold, the four had each one wheel on the ground near the living creatures.
And when the living creatures went, the wheels went by them: and when the living creatures lifted themselves off the earth, the wheels were lifted off.
Wherever the cloud happened to be, there was the spirit ready to go: the wheels went and were lifted up with them; because the spirit of life was in the wheels.
When those went, the wheels went; and when those stood, the wheels stood; and when those lifted themselves off the earth, they were lifted off with them: for the spirit of life was in the wheels.
And the likeness over the heads of the living creatures was as a firmament, as the appearance of crystal, spread out over their wings above.
And lo! a voice from above the firmament
And I will say to them, If it be good in your eyes, give me my price, or refuse it. And they weighed for my price thirty pieces of silver.
And the Lord said to me, Drop them into the furnace, and I will see if it is good metal, as I was proved for their sakes. And I took the thirty pieces of silver, and cast them into the furnace in the house of the Lord.
And God appeared to him by the oak of Mambre, as he sat by the door of his tent at noon.
And he lifted up his eyes and beheld, and lo! three men stood before him; and having seen them he ran to meet them from the door of his tent, and did obeisance to the ground.
And Abraam hasted to the tent to Sarrha, and said to her, Hasten, and knead three measures of fine flour, and make cakes.
And Abraam ran to the kine, and took a young calf, tender and good, and gave it to his servant, and he hasted to dress it.
And he took butter and milk, and the calf which he had dressed; and he set them before them, and they did eat, and he stood by them under the tree.
And he said to him, Where is Sarrha thy wife? And he answered and said, Behold! in the tent.
But Abraam shall become a great and populous nation, and in him shall all the nations of the earth be blest.
For I know that he will order his sons, and his house after him, and they will keep the ways of the Lord, to do justice and judgment, that the Lord may bring upon Abraam all things whatsoever he has spoken to him.
And the Lord said, The cry of Sodom and Gomorrha has been increased towards me, and their sins are very great.
I will therefore go down and see, if they completely correspond with the cry which comes to me, and if not, that I may know.
And Abraam drew nigh and said, Wouldest thou destroy the righteous with the wicked, and shall the righteous be as the wicked?
Should there be fifty righteous in the city, wilt thou destroy them? wilt thou not spare the whole place for the sake of the fifty righteous, if they be in it?
By no means shalt thou do as this thing so as to destroy the righteous with the wicked, so the righteous shall be as the wicked: by no means. Thou that judgest the whole earth, shalt thou not do right?
And the Lord said, If there should be in Sodom fifty righteous in the city, I will spare the whole city, and the whole place for their sakes.
And Abraam answered and said, Now I have begun to speak to my Lord, and I am earth and ashes.
But if the fifty righteous should be diminished to forty-five, wilt thou destroy the whole city because of the five ? And he said, I will not destroy it, if I should find there forty-five.
And he said, Since I am able to speak to the Lord, what if there should be found there twenty? And he said, I will not destroy it, if I should find there twenty.
And he said, Will there be anything , Lord, if I speak yet once? but if there should be found there ten? And he said, I will not destroy it for the ten's sake.
And it came to pass in the fourth year of Darius the king, that the word of the Lord came to Zacharias on the fourth day of the ninth month, which is Chaseleu.
All the works of the humble man are manifest with God; but the ungodly shall perish in an evil day.
Every one that is proud in heart is unclean before God, and he that unjustly strikes hands with hand shall not be held guiltless. The beginning of a good way is to do justly; and it is more acceptable with God than to offer sacrifices. He that seeks the Lord shall find knowledge with righteousness: and they that rightly seek him shall find peace. All of the works of the Lord are done with righteousness; and the ungodly man is kept for the evil day.
There is an oracle upon the lips of a king; and his mouth shall not err in judgment.
The poise of the balance is righteousness with the Lord; and his works are righteous measures.
An evil-doer is an abomination to a king; for the throne of rule is established by righteousness.
Righteous lips are acceptable to a king; and he loves right words.
The anger of a king is a messenger of death; but a wise man will pacify him.
The son of a king is in the light of life; and they that are in favour with him are as a cloud of latter rain.
The brood of wisdom is more to be chosen than gold, and the brood of prudence more to be chosen than silver.
The paths of life turn aside from evil; and the ways of righteousness are length of life. He that receives instruction shall be in prosperity; and he that regards reproofs shall be made wise. He that keeps his ways, preserves his own soul; and he that loves his life will spare his mouth.
Pride goes before destruction, and folly before a fall.
Better is a meek-spirited man with lowliness, than one who divides spoils with the proud.
He who is skillful in business finds good: but he that trusts in God is most blessed.
Men call the wise and understanding evil: but they that are pleasing in speech shall hear more.
Understanding is a fountain of life to its possessors; but the instruction of fools is evil.
The heart of the wise will discern the things which proceed from his own mouth; and on his lips he will wear knowledge.
Good words are honeycombs, and the sweetness thereof is a healing of the soul.
There are ways that seem to be right to a man, but the end of them looks to the depth of hell.
A man who labours, labours for himself, and drives from him his own ruin.
But the perverse bears destruction upon his own mouth: a foolish man digs up evil for himself, and treasures fire on his own lips.
A perverse man spreads mischief, and will kindle a torch of deceit with mischiefs; and he separates friends.
A transgressor tries to ensnare friends, and leads them in ways that are not good.
And the man that fixes his eyes devises perverse things, and marks out with his lips all evil: he is a furnace of wickedness.
Old age is a crown of honour, but it is found in the ways of righteousness.
A man slow to anger is better than a strong man; and he that governs his temper better than he that takes a city.
All evils come upon the ungodly into their bosoms; but all righteous things come of the Lord.
Cry to me, and I will answer thee, and I will declare to thee great and mighty things, which thou knowest not.
For thus saith the Lord concerning the houses of this city, and concerning the houses of the king of Juda, which have been pulled down for mounds and fortifications,
to fight against the Chaldeans, and to fill it with the corpses of men, whom I smote in mine anger and my wrath, and turned away my face from them, for all their wickedness:
Behold, I bring upon her healing and cure, and I will show myself to them, and will heal her, and make both peace and security.
And I will turn the captivity of Juda, and the captivity of Israel, and will build them, even as before.
And I will cleanse them from all their iniquities, whereby they have sinned against me, and will not remember their sins, whereby they have sinned against me, and revolted from me.
And it shall be for joy and praise, and for glory to all the people of the earth, who shall hear all the good that I will do: and they shall fear and be provoked for all the good things and for all the peace which I will bring upon them.
Thus saith the Lord; There shall yet be heard in this place, of which ye say, it is destitute of men and cattle, in the cities of Juda, and in the streets of Jerusalem, the places that have been made desolate for want of men and cattle,
the voice of gladness, and the voice of joy, the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride, the voice of men saying, Give thanks to the Lord Almighty: for the Lord is good; for his mercy endures fore ever: and they shall bring gifts into the house of the Lord; for I will turn all the captivity of that land as before, said the Lord.
Thus saith the Lord of hosts; There shall yet be in this place, that is desert for want of man and beast, in all the cities thereof, resting-places for shepherds causing their flocks to lie down.
In the cities of the hill country, and in the cities of the valley, and in the cities of the south, and in the land of Benjamin, and in the cities round about Jerusalem, and in the cities of Juda, flocks shall yet pass under the hand of him that numbers them, saith the Lord.
O Lord, thou hast proved me, and known me.
Thou knowest my down-sitting and mine up-rising: thou understandest my thoughts long before.
Thou hast traced my path and my bed, and hast foreseen all my ways.
For there is no unrighteous word in my tongue: behold, O Lord, thou hast known all things,
the last and the first: thou hast fashioned me, and laid thine hand upon me.
The knowledge of thee is too wonderful for me; it is very difficult, I cannot attain to it.
Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? and whither shall I flee from my presence?
If I should go up to heaven, thou art there: if I should go down to hell, thou art present.
If I should spread my wings to fly straight forward, and sojourn at the extremity of the sea, it would be vain,
for even there thy hand would guide me, and thy right hand would hold me.
When I said, Surely the darkness will cover me; even the night was light in my luxury.
For darkness will not be darkness with thee; but night will be light as day: as its darkness, so shall its light be to thee.
For thou, O Lord, hast possessed my reins; thou hast helped me from my mother's womb.
I will give thee thanks; for thou art fearfully wondrous; wondrous are thy works; and my soul knows it well.
My bones, which thou madest in secret were not hidden from thee, nor my substance, in the lowest parts of the earth.
Thine eyes saw my unwrought substance, and all men shall be written in thy book; they shall be formed by day, though there should for a time be no one among them.
But thy friends, O God, have been greatly honoured by me; their rule has been greatly strengthened.
I will number them, and they shall be multiplied beyond the sand; I awake, and am still with thee.
Oh that thou wouldest slay the wicked, O God; depart from me, ye men of blood.
For thou wilt say concerning their thought, that they shall take thy cities in vain.
Have I not hated them, O Lord, that hate thee? and wasted away because of thine enemies?
I have hated them with perfect hatred; they were counted my enemies.
Prove me, O God, and know my heart; examine me, and know my paths;
and see if there is any way of iniquity in me, and lead me in an everlasting way.
The Lord reigns; he has clothed himself with honour: the Lord has clothed and girded himself with strength; for he has established the world, which shall not be moved.
Thy throne is prepared of old: thou art from everlasting.
The rivers have lifted up, O Lord, the rivers have lifted up their voices,
at the voices of many waters: the billows of the sea are wonderful: the Lord is wonderful in high places.
Thy testimonies are made very sure: holiness becomes thine house, O Lord, for ever.
And Moses and the elders of Israel commanded, saying, Keep all these commands, all that I command you this day.
And it shall come to pass in the day when ye shall cross over Jordan into the land which the Lord thy God gives thee, that thou shalt set up for thyself great stones, and shalt plaster them with plaster.
And he shall be as the wild tamarisk in the desert: he shall not see when good comes; but he shall dwell in barren places, and in the wilderness, in a salt land which is not inhabited.
But blessed is the man who trusts in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord shall be.
And he shall be as a thriving tree by the waters, and he shall cast forth his root toward a moist place: he shall not fear when heat comes, and there shall be upon him shady branches: he shall not fear in a year of drought, and he shall not fail to bear fruit.
The heart is deep beyond all things, and it is the man, and who can know him?
I the Lord try the hearts, and prove the reins, to give to every one according to his ways, and according to the fruits of his devices.
The partridge utters her voice, she gathers eggs which she did not lay; so is a man gaining his wealth unjustly; in the midst of his days his riches shall leave him, and at his latter end he will be a fool.
Thus saith the Lord; Go and stand in the gates of the children of thy people, by which the kings of Juda enter, and by which they go out, and in all the gates of Jerusalem:
and thou shalt say to them, Hear the word of the Lord, ye kings of Juda, and all Judea, and all Jerusalem, all who go in at these gates:
thus saith the Lord; Take heed to your souls, and take up no burdens on the sabbath-day, and go not forth through the gates of Jerusalem;
and carry forth no burdens out of your houses on the sabbath-day, and ye shall do no work: sanctify the sabbath-day, as I commanded your fathers.
But they hearkened not, and inclined not their ear, but stiffened their neck more than their fathers did, so as not to hear me, and not to receive correction.
And it shall come to pass, if ye will hearken to me, saith the Lord, to carry in no burdens through the gates of this city on the sabbath-day, and to sanctify the sabbath-day, so as to do no work upon it,
that there shall enter through the gates of this city kings and princes sitting on the throne of David, and riding on their chariots and horses, they, and their princes, the men of Juda, and the dwellers in Jerusalem: and this city shall be inhabited for ever.
All wisdom cometh from the Lord, and is with him for ever.
Who can number the sand of the sea, and the drops of rain, and the days of eternity?
Who can find out the height of heaven, and the breadth of the earth, and the deep, and wisdom?
Wisdom hath been created before all things, and the understanding of prudence from everlasting.
The word of God most high is the fountain of wisdom; and her ways are everlasting commandments.
To whom hath the root of wisdom been revealed? or who hath known her wise counsels?
Unto whom hath the knowledge of wisdom been made manifest? and who hath understood her great experience?
There is one wise and greatly to be feared, the Lord sitting upon his throne.
He created her, and saw her, and numbered her, and poured her out upon all his works.
She is with all flesh according to his gift, and he hath given her to them that love him.
The fear of the Lord is honour, and glory, and gladness, and a crown of rejoicing.
The fear of the Lord maketh a merry heart, and giveth joy, and gladness, and a long life.
Whoso feareth the Lord, it shall go well with him at the last, and he shall find favour in the day of his death.
To fear the Lord is the beginning of wisdom: and it was created with the faithful in the womb.
She hath built an everlasting foundation with men, and she shall continue with their seed.
To fear the Lord is fulness of wisdom, and filleth men with her fruits.
She filleth all their house with things desirable, and the garners with her increase.
The fear of the Lord is a crown of wisdom, making peace and perfect health to flourish; both which are the gifts of God: and it enlargeth their rejoicing that love him.
Wisdom raineth down skill and knowledge of understanding standing, and exalteth them to honour that hold her fast.
The root of wisdom is to fear the Lord, and the branches thereof are long life.
The fear of the Lord driveth away sins: and where it is present, it turneth away wrath.
A furious man cannot be justified; for the sway of his fury shall be his destruction.
A patient man will tear for a time, and afterward joy shall spring up unto him.
He will hide his words for a time, and the lips of many shall declare his wisdom.
The parables of knowledge are in the treasures of wisdom: but godliness is an abomination to a sinner.
If thou desire wisdom, keep the commandments, and the Lord shall give her unto thee.
For the fear of the Lord is wisdom and instruction: and faith and meekness are his delight.
Distrust not the fear of the Lord when thou art poor: and come not unto him with a double heart.
Be not an hypocrite in the sight of men, and take good heed what thou speakest.
Exalt not thyself, lest thou fall, and bring dishonour upon thy soul, and so God discover thy secrets, and cast thee down in the midst of the congregation, because thou camest not in truth to the fear of the Lord, but thy heart is full of deceit.
And the Lord spoke to Aaron, saying, Thou and thy sons and thy father's house shall bear the sins of the holy things, and thou and thy sons shall bear the iniquity of your priesthood.
And take to thyself thy brethren the tribe of Levi, the family of thy father, and let them be joined to thee, and let them minister to thee; and thou and thy sons with thee shall minister before the tabernacle of witness.
And they shall keep thy charges, and the charges of the tabernacle; only they shall not approach the holy vessels and the altar, so both they and you shall not die.
And they shall be joined to thee, and shall keep the charges of the tabernacle of witness, in all the services of the tabernacle; and a stranger shall not approach to thee.
And ye shall keep the charges of the holy things, and the charges of the altar, and so there shall not be anger among the children of Israel.
And I have taken your brethren the Levites out of the midst of the children of Israel, a present given to the Lord, to minister in the services of the tabernacle of witness.
And thou and thy sons after thee shall keep up your priestly ministration, according to the whole manner of the altar, and that which is within the veil; and ye shall minister in the services as the office of your priesthood; and the stranger that comes near shall die.
And the Lord said to Aaron, And, behold, I have given you the charge of the first-fruits of all things consecrated to me by the children of Israel; and I have given them to thee as an honour, and to thy sons after thee for a perpetual ordinance.
And let this be to you from all the holy things that are consecrated to me, even the burnt-offerings, from all their gifts, and from all their sacrifices, and from every trespass-offering of theirs, and from all their sin-offerings, whatever things they give to me of all their holy things, they shall be thine and thy sons'.
And, behold, I have given to the sons of Levi every tithe in Israel for an inheritance for their services, whereinsoever they perform ministry in the tabernacle of witness.
And the children of Israel shall no more draw nigh to the tabernacle of witness to incur fatal guilt.
And the Levite himself shall perform the service of the tabernacle of witness; and they shall bear their iniquities, it is a perpetual statute throughout their generations; and in the midst of the children of Israel they shall not receive an inheritance.
Because I have given as a distinct portion to the Levites for an inheritance the tithes of the children of Israel, whatsoever they shall offer to the Lord; therefore I said to them, In the midst of the children of Israel they shall have no inheritance.
And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying,
Thou shalt also speak to the Levites, and shalt say to them, If ye take the tithe from the children of Israel, which I have given you from them for an inheritance, then shall ye separate from it a heave-offering to the Lord, a tenth of the tenth.
And your heave-offerings shall be reckoned to you as corn from the floor, and an offering from the wine-press.
So shall ye also separate them from all the offerings of the Lord out of all your tithes, whatsoever ye shall receive from the children of Israel; and ye shall give of them an offering to the Lord to Aaron the priest.
Of all your gifts ye shall offer an offering to the Lord, and of every first-fruit the consecrated part from it.
And thou shalt say to them, When ye shall offer the first-fruits from it, then shall it be reckoned to the Levites as produce from the threshing-floor, and as produce from the wine-press.
And ye shall eat it in any place, ye and your families; for this is your reward for your services in the tabernacle of witness.
And ye shall not bear sin by reason of it, for ye shall have offered an offering of first-fruits from it, and ye shall not profane the holy things of the children of Israel, that ye die not.
Thus said the Lord; Behold, I will turn the captivity of Jacob, and will have pity upon his prisoners; and the city shall be built upon her hill, and the people shall settle after their manner.
My son, hast thou sinned? do so no more, but ask pardon for thy former sins.
Flee from sin as from the face of a serpent: for if thou comest too near it, it will bite thee: the teeth thereof are as the teeth of a lion, slaying the souls of men.
All iniquity is as a two edged sword, the wounds whereof cannot be healed.
To terrify and do wrong will waste riches: thus the house of proud men shall be made desolate.
A prayer out of a poor man's mouth reacheth to the ears of God, and his judgment cometh speedily.
He that hateth to be reproved is in the way of sinners: but he that feareth the Lord will repent from his heart.
An eloquent man is known far and near; but a man of understanding knoweth when he slippeth.
He that buildeth his house with other men's money is like one that gathereth himself stones for the tomb of his burial.
The congregation of the wicked is like tow wrapped together: and the end of them is a flame of fire to destroy them.
The way of sinners is made plain with stones, but at the end thereof is the pit of hell.
He that keepeth the law of the Lord getteth the understanding thereof: and the perfection of the fear of the Lord is wisdom.
He that is not wise will not be taught: but there is a wisdom which multiplieth bitterness.
The knowledge of a wise man shall abound like a flood: and his counsel is like a pure fountain of life.
The inner parts of a fool are like a broken vessel, and he will hold no knowledge as long as he liveth.
If a skilful man hear a wise word, he will commend it, and add unto it: but as soon as one of no understanding heareth it, it displeaseth him, and he casteth it behind his back.
The talking of a fool is like a burden in the way: but grace shall be found in the lips of the wise.
They enquire at the mouth of the wise man in the congregation, and they shall ponder his words in their heart.
As is a house that is destroyed, so is wisdom to a fool: and the knowledge of the unwise is as talk without sense.
Doctrine unto fools is as fetters on the feet, and like manacles on the right hand.
A fool lifteth up his voice with laughter; but a wise man doth scarce smile a little.
Learning is unto a wise man as an ornament of gold, and like a bracelet upon his right arm.
A foolish man's foot is soon in his neighbour's house: but a man of experience is ashamed of him.
A fool will peep in at the door into the house: but he that is well nurtured will stand without.
It is the rudeness of a man to hearken at the door: but a wise man will be grieved with the disgrace.
The lips of talkers will be telling such things as pertain not unto them: but the words of such as have understanding are weighed in the balance.
The heart of fools is in their mouth: but the mouth of the wise is in their heart.
When the ungodly curseth Satan, he curseth his own soul.
A whisperer defileth his own soul, and is hated wheresoever he dwelleth.
Blessed are the blameless in the way, who walk in the law of the Lord.
Blessed are they that search out his testimonies: they will diligently seek him with the whole heart.
For they that work iniquity have not walked in his ways.
Thou hast commanded us diligently to keep thy precepts.
O that my ways were directed to keep thine ordinances.
Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect to all thy commandments.
I will give thee thanks with uprightness of heart, when I have learnt the judgments of thy righteousness.
I will keep thine ordinances: O forsake me not greatly.
Wherewith shall a young man direct his way? by keeping thy words.
With my whole heart have I diligently sought thee: cast me not away from thy commandments.
I have hidden thine oracles in my heart, that I might not sin against thee.
Blessed art thou, O Lord: teach me thine ordinances.
With my lips have I declared all the judgments of thy mouth.
I have delighted in the way of thy testimonies, as much as in all riches.
I will meditate on thy commandments, and consider thy ways.
I will meditate on thine ordinances: I will not forget thy words.
Render a recompense to thy servant: so shall I live, and keep thy words.
Unveil thou mine eyes, and I shall perceive wondrous things of thy law.
I am a stranger in the earth: hide not thy commandments from me.
My soul has longed exceedingly for thy judgments at all times.
Thou has rebuked the proud: cursed are they that turn aside from thy commandments.
Remove from me reproach and contempt; for I have sought out thy testimonies.
For princes sat and spoke against me: but thy servant was meditating on thine ordinances.
For thy testimonies are my meditation, and thine ordinances are my counsellors.
My soul has cleaved to the ground; quicken thou me according to thy word.
I declared my ways, and thou didst hear me: teach me thine ordinances.
Instruct me in the way of thine ordinances; and I will meditate on thy wondrous works.
My soul has slumbered for sorrow; strengthen thou me with thy words.
Remove from me the way of iniquity; and be merciful to me by thy law.
I have chosen the way of truth; and have not forgotten thy judgments.
I have cleaved to thy testimonies, O Lord; put me not to shame.
I ran the way of thy commandments, when thou didst enlarge my heart.
Teach me, O Lord, the way of thine ordinances, and I will seek it out continually.
Instruct me, and I will search out thy law, and will keep it with my whole heart.
Guide me in the path of thy commandments; for I have delighted in it.
Incline mine heart to thy testimonies, and not to covetousness.
Turn away mine eyes that I may not behold vanity: quicken thou me in thy way.
Confirm thine oracle to thy servant, that he may fear thee.
Take away my reproach which I have feared: for thy judgments are good.
Behold, I have desired thy commandments: quicken me in thy righteousness.
And let thy mercy come upon me, O Lord; even thy salvation, according to thy word.
And so I shall render an answer to them that reproach me: for I have trusted in thy words.
And take not the word of truth utterly out of my mouth; for I have hoped in thy judgments.
So shall I keep thy law continually, for ever and ever.
I walked also at large: for I sought out thy commandments.
And I spoke of thy testimonies before kings, and was not ashamed.
And I meditated on thy commandments, which I loved exceedingly.
And I lifted up my hands to thy commandments which I loved; and I meditated in thine ordinances.
Remember thy words to thy servant, wherein thou hast made me hope.
This has comforted me in mine affliction: for thine oracle has quickened me.
The proud have transgressed exceedingly; but I swerved not from thy law.
I remembered thy judgments of old, O Lord; and was comforted.
Despair took hold upon me, because of the sinners who forsake thy law.
Thine ordinances were my songs in the place of my sojourning.
I remembered thy name, O Lord, in the night, and kept thy law.
This I had, because I diligently sought thine ordinances.
Thou art my portion, O Lord: I said that I would keep thy law.
I besought thy favour with my whole heart: have mercy upon me according to thy word.
I thought on thy ways, and turned my feet to thy testimonies.
I prepared myself, (and was not terrified,) to keep thy commandments.
The snares of sinners entangled me: but I forgot not thy law.
At midnight I arose, to give thanks to thee for the judgments of thy righteousness.
I am a companion of all them that fear thee, and of them that keep thy commandments.
O Lord, the earth is full of thy mercy: teach me thine ordinances.
Thou hast wrought kindly with thy servant, o Lord, according to thy word.
Teach me kindness, and instruction, and knowledge: for I have believed thy commandments.
Before I was afflicted, I transgressed; therefore have I kept thy word.
Good art thou, O Lord; therefore in thy goodness teach me thine ordinances.
The injustice of the proud has been multiplied against me: but I will search out thy commandments with all my heart.
Their heart has been curdled like milk; but I have meditated on thy law.
It is good for me that thou hast afflicted me; that I might learn thine ordinances.
The law of thy mouth is better to me than thousands of gold and silver.
Thy hands have made me, and fashioned me: instruct me, that I may learn thy commandments.
They that fear thee will see me and rejoice: for I have hoped in thy words.
I know, O Lord, that thy judgments are righteousness, and that thou in truthfulness hast afflicted me.
Let, I pray thee, thy mercy be to comfort me, according to thy word to thy servant.
Let thy compassions come to me, that I may live: for thy law is my meditation.
Let the proud be ashamed; for they transgressed against me unjustly: but I will meditate in thy commandments.
Let those that fear thee, and those that know thy testimonies, turn to me.
Let mine heart be blameless in thine ordinances, that I may not be ashamed.
My soul faints for thy salvation: I have hoped in thy words.
Mine eyes failed in waiting for thy word, saying, When wilt thou comfort me?
For I am become as a bottle in the frost: yet I have not forgotten thine ordinances.
How many are the days of thy servant? when wilt thou execute judgment for me on them that persecute me?
Transgressors told me idle tales; but not according to thy law, O Lord.
All thy commandments are truth; they persecuted me unjustly; help thou me.
They nearly made an end of me in the earth; but I forsook not thy commandments.
Quicken me according to thy mercy; so shall I keep the testimonies of thy mouth.
Thy word, O Lord, abides in heaven for ever.
Thy truth endures to all generations; thou hast founded the earth, and it abides.
The day continues by thy arrangement; for all things are thy servants.
Were it not that thy law is my meditation, then I should have perished in mine affliction.
I will never forget thine ordinances; for with them thou hast quickened me.
I am thine, save me; for I have sought out thine ordinances.
Sinners laid wait for me to destroy me; but I understood thy testimonies.
have seen an end of all perfection; but thy commandment is very broad.
How I have loved thy law, O Lord! it is my meditation all the day.
Thou hast made me wiser than mine enemies in thy commandment; for it is mine for ever.
I have more understanding than all my teachers; for thy testimonies are my medication.
I understand more that the aged; because I have sought out thy commandments.
I have kept back my feet from every evil way, that I might keep thy words.
I have not declined from thy judgments; for thou hast instructed me.
How sweet are thine oracles to my throat! more so than honey to my mouth!
I gain understanding by thy commandments: therefore I have hated every way of unrighteousness.
Thy law is a lamp to my feet, and a light to my paths.
I have sworn and determined to keep the judgments of thy righteousness.
I have been very greatly afflicted, O Lord: quicken me, according to thy word.
Accept, I pray thee, O Lord, the freewill-offerings of my mouth, and teach me thy judgments.
My soul is continually in thine hands; and I have not forgotten thy law.
Sinners spread a snare for me; but I erred not from thy commandments.
I have inherited thy testimonies for ever; for they are the joy of my heart.
I have inclined my heart to perform thine ordinances for ever, in return for thy mercies.
I have hated transgressors; but I have loved thy law.
Thou art my helper and my supporter; I have hoped in thy words.
Depart from me, ye evil-doers; for I will search out the commandments of my God.
Uphold me according to thy word, and quicken me; and make me not ashamed of my expectation.
Help me, and I shall be saved; and I will meditate in thine ordinances continually.
Thou hast brought to nought all that depart from thine ordinances; for their inward thought is unrighteous.
I have reckoned all the sinners of the earth as transgressors; therefore have I loved thy testimonies.
Penetrate my flesh with thy fear; for I am afraid of thy judgments.
I have done judgment and justice; deliver me not up to them that injure me.
Receive thy servant for good: let not the proud accuse me falsely.
Mine eyes have failed for thy salvation, and for the word of thy righteousness.
Deal with thy servant according to thy mercy, and teach me thine ordinances.
I am thy servant; instruct me, and I shall know thy testimonies.
It is time for the Lord to work: they have utterly broken thy law.
Therefore have I loved thy commandments more than gold, or the topaz.
Therefore I directed myself according to all thy commandments: I have hated every unjust way.
Thy testimonies are wonderful: therefore my soul has sought them out.
The manifestation of thy words will enlighten, and instruct the simple.
I opened my mouth, and drew breath: for I earnestly longed after thy commandments.
Look upon me and have mercy upon me, after the manner of them that love thy name.
Order my steps according to thy word: and let not any iniquity have dominion over me.
Deliver me from the false accusation of men: so will I keep thy commandments.
Cause thy face to shine upon thy servant: and teach me thine ordinances.
Mine eyes have been bathed in streams of water, because I kept not thy law.
Righteous art thou, O Lord, and upright are thy judgments.
Thou has commanded righteousness and perfect truth, as thy testimonies.
Thy zeal has quite wasted me: because mine enemies have forgotten thy words.
Thy word has been very fully tried; and thy servant loves it.
I am young and despised: yet I have not forgotten thine ordinances.
Thy righteousness is an everlasting righteousness, and thy law is truth.
Afflictions and distresses found me: but thy commandments were my meditation.
Thy testimonies are an everlasting righteousness: instruct me, and I shall live.
I cried with my whole heart; hear me, O Lord: I will search out thine ordinances.
I cried to thee; save me, and I will keep thy testimonies.
I arose before the dawn, and cried: I hoped in thy words.
Mine eyes prevented the dawn, that I might meditate on thine oracles.
Hear my voice, O Lord, according to thy mercy; quicken me according to thy judgment.
They have drawn nigh who persecuted me unlawfully; and they are far removed from thy law.
Thou art near, O Lord; and all thy ways are truth.
I have known of old concerning thy testimonies, that thou hast founded them for ever.
Look upon mine affliction, and rescue me; for I have not forgotten thy law.
Plead my cause, and ransom me: quicken me because of thy word.
Salvation is far from sinners: for they have not searched out thine ordinances.
Thy mercies, O Lord, are many: quicken me according to thy judgment.
Many are they that persecute me and oppress me: but I have not declined from thy testimonies.
I beheld men acting foolishly, and I pined away; for they kept not thine oracles.
Behold, I have loved thy commandments, O Lord: quicken me in thy mercy.
The beginning of thy words is truth; and all the judgments of thy righteousness endure for ever.
Princes persecuted me without a cause, but my heart feared because of thy words.
I will exult because of thine oracles, as one that finds much spoil.
I hate and abhor unrighteousness; but I love thy law.
Seven times in a day have I praised thee because of the judgments of thy righteousness.
Great peace have they that love thy law: and there is no stumbling-block to them.
I waited for thy salvation, O Lord, and have loved thy commandments.
My soul has kept thy testimonies, and loved them exceedingly.
I have kept thy commandments and thy testimonies; for all my ways are before thee, O Lord.
Let my supplication come near before thee, o Lord; instruct me according to thine oracle.
Let my petition come in before thee, O Lord; deliver me according to thine oracle.
Let my lips utter a hymn, when thou shalt have taught me thine ordinances.
Let my tongue utter thine oracles; for all thy commandments are righteous.
Let thine hand be prompt to save me; for I have chosen thy commandments.
I have longed after thy salvation, O Lord; and thy law is my meditation.
My soul shall live, and shall praise thee; and thy judgments shall help me.
And when the Lord thy God shall bring thee into the land, into which thou goest to possess it, and shall remove great nations from before thee, the Chettite, and Gergesite, and Amorite, and Chananite, and Pherezite, and Evite, and Jebusite, seven nations more numerous and stronger than you,
and the Lord thy God shall deliver them into thy hands, then thou shalt smite them: thou shalt utterly destroy them: thou shalt not make a covenant with them, neither shall ye pity them:
neither shall ye contract marriages with them: thou shalt not give thy daughter to his son, and thou shalt not take his daughter to thy son.
For he will draw away thy son from me, and he will serve other gods; and the Lord will be very angry with you, and will soon utterly destroy thee.
But thus shall ye do to them; ye shall destroy their altars, and shall break down their pillars, and shall cut down their groves, and shall burn with fire the graven images of their gods.
For thou art a holy people to the Lord thy God; and the Lord thy God chose thee to be to him a peculiar people beyond all nations that are upon the face of the earth.
It was not because ye are more numerous than all other nations that the Lord preferred you, and the Lord made choice of you: for ye are fewer in number than all other nations.
But because the Lord loved you, and as keeping the oath which he sware to your fathers, the Lord brought you out with a strong hand, and the Lord redeemed thee from the house of bondage, out of the hand of Pharao king of Egypt.
Thou shalt know therefore, that the Lord thy God, he is God, a faithful God, who keeps covenant and mercy for them that love him, and for those that keep his commandments to a thousand generations,
and who recompenses them that hate him to their face, to destroy them utterly; and will not be slack with them that hate him: he will recompense them to their face.
Thou shalt keep therefore the commands, and the ordinances, and these judgments, which I command thee this day to do.
And it shall come to pass when ye shall have heard these ordinances, and shall have kept and done them, that the Lord thy God shall keep for thee the covenant and the mercy, which he sware to your fathers.
And he will love thee, and bless thee, and multiply thee; and he will bless the off-spring of thy body, and the fruit of thy land, thy corn, and thy wine, and thine oil, the herds of thine oxen, and the flocks of thy sheep, on the land which the Lord sware to thy fathers to give to thee.
Thou shalt be blessed beyond all nations; there shall not be among you an impotent or barren one, or among thy cattle.
And the Lord thy God shall remove from thee all sickness; and none of the evil diseases of Egypt, which thou hast seen, and all that thou hast known, will he lay upon thee; but he will lay them upon all that hate thee.
And thou shalt eat all the spoils of the nations which the Lord thy God gives thee; thine eye shall not spare them, and thou shalt not serve their gods; for this is an offence to thee.
But if thou shouldest say in thine heart, This nation is greater than I, how shall I be able to destroy them utterly?
thou shalt not fear them; thou shalt surely remember all that the Lord thy God did to Pharao and to all the Egyptians:
the great temptations which thine eyes have seen, those signs and great wonders, the strong hand, and the high arm; how the Lord thy God brought thee forth: so the Lord your God will do to all the nations, whom thou fearest in their presence.
And the Lord thy God shall send against them the hornets, until they that are left and they that are hidden from thee be utterly destroyed.
Thou shalt not be wounded before them, because the Lord thy God in the midst of thee is a great and powerful God.
And the Lord thy God shall consume these nations before thee by little and little: thou shalt not be able to consume them speedily, lest the land become desert, and the wild beasts of the field be multiplied against thee.
And the Lord thy God shall deliver them into thy hands, and thou shalt destroy them with a great destruction, until ye shall have utterly destroyed them.
And he shall deliver their kings into your hands, and ye shall destroy their name from that place; none shall stand up in opposition before thee, until thou shalt have utterly destroyed them.
Ye shall burn with fire the graven images of their gods: thou shalt not covet their silver, neither shalt thou take to thyself gold from them, lest thou shouldest offend thereby, because it is an abomination to the Lord thy God.
And thou shalt not bring an abomination into thine house, so shouldest thou be an accursed thing like it; thou shalt utterly hate it, and altogether abominate it, because it is an accursed thing.
And the second lot came out for the children of Symeon; and their inheritance was in the midst of the lots of the children of Juda.
And their lot was Beersabee, and Samaa, and Caladam,
and Arsola, and Bola, and Jason,
and Erthula, and Bula, and Herma,
and Sikelac, and Baethmachereb, and Sarsusin,
and Batharoth, and their fields, thirteen cities, and their villages.
Eremmon, and Thalcha, and Jether, and Asan; four cities and their villages,
round about their cities as far as Balec as men go to Bameth southward: this is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Symeon according to their families.
The inheritance of the tribe of the children of Symeon was a part of the lot of Juda, for the portion of the children of Juda was greater than theirs; and the children of Symeon inherited in the midst of their lot.
And the third lot came out to Zabulon according to their families: the bounds of their inheritance shall beEsedekgola shall be their border,
the sea and Magelda, and it shall reach to Baetharaba in the valley, which is opposite Jekman.
And the border returned from Sedduc in a contrary direction eastward from Baethsamys, to the borders of Chaselothaith, and shall pass on to Dabiroth, and shall proceed upward to Phangai.
And thence it shall come round in the opposite direction eastward to Gebere to the city of Catasem, and shall go on to Remmonaa Matharaoza.
And the borders shall come round northward to Amoth, and their going out shall be at Gaephael,
and Catanath, and Nabaal, and Symoon, and Jericho, and Baethman.
This is the inheritance of the tribe of the sons of Zabulon according to their families, these cities and their villages.
And the fourth lot came out to Issachar.
And their borders were Jazel, and Chasaloth, and Sunam,
and Agin, and Siona, and Reeroth,
and Anachereth, and Dabiron, and Kison, and Rebes,
and Remmas, and Jeon, and Tomman, and Aemarec, and Bersaphes.
And the boundaries shall border upon Gaethbor, and upon Salim westward, and Baethsamys; and the extremity of his bounds shall be Jordan.
This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Issachar according to their families, the cities and their villages.
And the fifth lot came out to Aser according to their families.
And their borders were Exeleketh, and Aleph, and Baethok, and Keaph,
and Elimelech, and Amiel, and Maasa, and the lot will border on Carmel westward, and on Sion, and Labanath.
And it will return westward from Baethegeneth, and will join Zabulon and Ekgai, and Phthaeel northwards, and the borders will come to Saphthaebaethme, and Inael, and will go on to Chobamasomel,
and Elbon, and Raab, and Ememaon, and Canthan to great Sidon.
And the borders shall turn back to Rama, and to the fountain of Masphassat, and the Tyrians; and the borders shall return to Jasiph, and their going forth shall be the sea, and Apoleb, and Echozob,
and Archob, and Aphec, and Raau.
This is the inheritance of the tribe of the sons of Aser according to their families, the cities and their villages.
And the sixth lot came out to Nephthali.
And their borders were Moolam, and Mola, and Besemiin, and Arme, and Naboc, and Jephthamai, as far as Dodam; and their goings out were Jordan.
And the coasts will return westward by Athabor, and will go out thence to Jacana, and will border on Zabulon southward, and Aser will join it westward, and Jordan eastward.
And the walled cities of the Tyrians, Tyre, and Omathadaketh, and Kenereth,
and Armaith, and Areal, and Asor,
and Cades, and Assari, and the well of Asor;
and Keroe, and Megalaarim, and Baetthame, and Thessamys.
This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Nephthali.
And the seventh lot came out to 27.
And their borders were Sarath, and Asa, and the cities of Sammaus,
and Salamin, and Ammon, and Silatha,
and Elon, and Thamnatha, and Accaron;
and Alcatha, and Begethon, and Gebeelan,
and Azor, and Banaebacat, and Gethremmon.
And westward of Hieracon the border was near to Joppa.
This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Dan, according to their families, these are their cities and their villages: and the children of Dan did not drive out the Amorite who afflicted them in the mountain; and the Amorite would not suffer them to come down into the valley, but they forcibly took from them the border of their portion.
And the sons of Dan went and fought against Lachis, and took it, and smote it with the edge of the sword; and they dwelt in it, and called the name of it Lasendan: and the Amorite continued to dwell in Edom and in Salamin: and the hand of Ephraim prevailed against them, and they became tribute to them.
And they proceeded to take possession of the land according to their borders, and the children of Israel gave an inheritance to Joshua the son of Naue among them,
by the command of God, and they gave him the city which he asked for, Thamnasarach, which is in the mount of Ephraim; and he built the city, and dwelt in it.
In the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month, between the evening times is the Lord's passover.
And on the fifteenth day of this month is the feast of unleavened bread to the Lord; seven days shall ye eat unleavened bread.
And the first day shall be a holy convocation to you: ye shall do no servile work.
And ye shall offer whole-burnt-offerings to the Lord seven days; and the seventh day shall be a holy convocation to you: ye shall do no servile work.
And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the children of Israel, and thou shalt say to them, When ye shall enter into the land which I give you, and reap the harvest of it, then shall ye bring a sheaf, the first-fruits of your harvest, to the priest;
and he shall lift up the sheaf before the Lord, to be accepted for you. On the morrow of the first day the priest shall lift it up.
And ye shall offer on the day on which ye bring the sheaf, a lamb without blemish of a year old for a whole-burnt-offering to the Lord.
Thus saith the Lord; Behold, I will turn back the weapons of war wherewith ye fight against the Chaldeans that have besieged you from outside the wall, and I will gather them into the midst of this city.
And I will fight against you with an outstretched hand and with a strong arm, with wrath and great anger.
And I will smite all the dwellers in this city, both men and cattle, with grievous pestilence: and they shall die.
And after this, thus saith the Lord; I will give Sedekias king of Juda, and his servants, and the people that is left in this city from the pestilence, and from the famine, and from the sword, into the hands of their enemies, that seek their lives: and they shall cut them in pieces with the edge of the sword: I will not spare them, and I will not have compassion upon them.
And thou shalt say to this people, Thus saith the Lord; Behold, I have set before you the way of life, and the way of death.
He that remains in this city shall die by the sword, and by famine: but he that goes forth to advance to the Chaldeans that have besieged you, shall live, and his life shall be to him for a spoil, and he shall live.
For I have set my face against this city for evil, and not for good: it shall be delivered into the hands of the king of Babylon, and he shall consume it with fire.
O house of the king of Juda, hear ye the word of the Lord.
O house of David, thus saith the Lord; Judge judgment in the morning, and act rightly, and rescue the spoiled one from the hand of him that wrongs him, lest mine anger be kindled like fire, and it burn, and there be none to quench it.
Behold, I am against thee that dwellest in the valley of Sor; in the plain country, even against them that say, Who shall alarm us? or who shall enter into our habitation?
And I will kindle a fire in the forest thereof, and it shall devour all things round about it.
Therefore thou shalt love the Lord thy God, and shalt observe his appointments, and his ordinances, and his commandments, and his judgments, always.
And ye shall know this day; for I speak not to your children, who know not and have not seen the discipline of the Lord thy God, and his wonderful works, and his strong hand, and his high arm,
and his miracles, and his wonders, which he wrought in the midst of Egypt on Pharao king of Egypt, and all his land;
and what he did to the host of the Egyptians, and to their chariots, and their cavalry, and their host; how he made the water of the Red Sea to overwhelm the face of them as they pursued after you, and the Lord destroyed them until this day;
and all the things which he did to you in the wilderness until ye came into this place;
and all the things that he did to Dathan and Abiron the sons of Eliab the son of Ruben, whom the earth opening her mouth swallowed up, and their houses, and their tents, and all their substance that was with them, in the midst of all Israel:
for your eyes have seen all the mighty works of the Lord, which he wrought among you to-day.
And ye shall keep all his commandments, as many as I command thee to-day, that ye may live, and be multiplied, and that ye may go in and inherit the land, into which ye go across Jordan to inherit it:
that ye may live long upon the land, which the Lord sware to your fathers to give to them, and to their seed after them, a land flowing with milk and honey.
For the land into which thou goest to inherit it, is not as the land of Egypt, whence ye came out, whensoever they sow the seed, and water it with their feet, as a garden of herbs:
but the land into which thou goest to inherit it, is a land of mountains and plains; it shall drink water of the rain of heaven.
A land which the Lord thy God surveys continually, the eyes of the Lord thy God are upon it from the beginning of the year to the end of the year.
Now if ye will indeed hearken to all the commands which I charge thee this day, to love the Lord thy God, and to serve him with all thy heart, and with all thy soul,
then he shall give to thy land the early and latter rain in its season, and thou shalt bring in thy corn, and thy wine, and thine oil.
And he shall give food in thy fields to thy cattle; and when thou hast eaten and art full,
take heed to thyself that thy heart be not puffed up, and ye transgress, and serve other gods, and worship them:
and the Lord be angry with you, and restrain the heaven; and there shall not be rain, and the earth shall not yield its fruit, and ye shall perish quickly from off the good land, which the Lord has given you.
And ye shall store these words in your heart and in your soul, and ye shall bind them as a sign on your hand, and it shall be fixed before your eyes.
And ye shall teach them to your children, so as to speak about them when thou sittest in the house, and when thou walkest by the way, and when thou sleepest, and when thou risest up.
And ye shall write them on the lintels of your houses, and on your gates;
that your days may be long, and the days of your children, upon the land which the Lord sware to your fathers to give to them, as the days of heaven upon the earth.
And it shall come to pass that if ye will indeed hearken to all these commands, which I charge thee to observe this day, to love the Lord our God, and to walk in all his ways, and to cleave close to him;
then the Lord shall cast out all these nations before you, and ye shall inherit great nations and stronger than yourselves.
Every place whereon the sole of your foot shall tread shall be your; from the wilderness and Antilibanus, and from the great river, the river Euphrates, even as far as the west sea shall be your coasts.
No one shall stand before you; and the Lord your God will put the fear of you and the dread of you on the face of all the land, on which ye shall tread, as he told you.
Behold, I set before you this day the blessing and the curse;
the blessing, if ye hearken to the commands of the Lord your God, all that I command you this day;
and the curse, if ye do not hearken to the commands of the Lord our God, as many as I command you this day, and ye wander from the way which I have commanded you, having gone to serve other gods, which ye know not.
And it shall come to pass when the Lord thy God shall have brought thee into the land into which thou goest over to inherit it, then thou shalt put blessing on mount Garizin, and the curse upon mount Gaebal.
Lo! are not these beyond Jordan, behind, westward in the land of Chanaan, which lies westward near Golgol, by the high oak?
For ye are passing over Jordan, to go in and inherit the land, which the Lord our God gives you to inherit always, and ye shall dwell in it.
And ye shall take heed to do all his ordinances, and these judgments, as many as I set before you to-day.
And Saul spoke to Jonathan his son, and to all his servants, to slay David.
And Jonathan, Saul's son, loved David much: and Jonathan told David, saying, Saul seeks to kill thee: take heed to thyself therefore to-morrow morning, and hide thyself, and dwell in secret.
And I will go forth, and stand near my father in the field where thou shalt be, and I will speak concerning thee to my father; and I will see what his answer may be, and I will tell thee.
And Jonathan spoke favorably concerning David to Saul his father, and said to him, Let not the king sin against thy servant David, for he has not sinned against thee, and his deeds are very good.
And he put his life in his hand, and smote the Philistine, and the Lord wrought a great deliverance; and all Israel saw, and rejoined: why then dost thou sin against innocent blood, to slay David without a cause?
And Saul hearkened to the voice of Jonathan; and Saul swore, saying, As the Lord lives, he shall not die.
And Jonathan called David, and told him all these words; and Jonathan brought David in to Saul, and he was before him as in former times.
And there was again war against Saul; and David did valiantly, and fought against the Philistines, and smote them with a very great slaughter, and they fled from before him.
And an evil spirit from God was upon Saul, and he was resting in his house, and a spear was in his hand, and David was playing on the harp with his hands.
And Saul sought to smite David with the spear; and David withdrew suddenly from the presence of Saul; and he drove the spear into the wall; and David retreated and escaped.
And it came to pass in that night, that Saul sent messengers to the house of David to watch him, in order to slay him in the morning; and Melchol David's wife told him, saying, Unless thou save thy life this night, to-morrow thou shalt be slain.
So Melchol lets David down by the window, and he departed, and fled, and escaped.
And Melchol took images, and laid them on the bed, and she put the liver of a goat by his head, and covered them with clothes.
And Saul sent messengers to take David; and they say that he is sick.
And he sends to David, saying, Bring him to me on the bed, that I may slay him.
And the messengers come, and, behold, the images were on the bed, and the goat's liver at his head.
And Saul said to Melchol, Why hast thou thus deceived me, and suffered my enemy to depart, and he has escaped? and Melchol said to Saul, He said, let me go, and if not, I will slay thee.
So David fled, and escaped, and comes to Samuel to Armathaim, and tells him all that Saul had done to him: and Samuel and David went, and dwelt in Navath in Rama.
And it was told Saul, saying, Behold, David is in Navath in Rama.
And Saul sent messengers to take David, and they saw the assembly of the prophets, and Samuel stood as appointed over them; and the Spirit of God came upon the messengers of Saul, and they prophesy.
And it was told Saul, and he sent other messengers, and they also prophesied: and Saul sent again a third set of messengers, and they also prophesied.
And Saul was very angry, and went himself also to Armathaim, and he comes as far as the well of the threshing floor that is in Sephi; and he asked and said, Where are Samuel and David? And they said, Behold, in Navath in Rama.
And he went thence to Navath in Rama: and there came the Spirit of God upon him also, and he went on prophesying till he came to Navath in Rama.
And he took off his clothes, and prophesied before them; and lay down naked all that day and all that night: therefore they said, Is Saul also among the prophets?
And Booz went up to the gate, and sat there; and behold, the relative passed by, of whom Booz spoke: and Booz said to him, Turn aside, sit down here, such a one: and he turned aside and sat down.
And Booz took ten men of the elders of the city, and said, Sit ye here; and they sat down.
And Booz said to the relative, The matter regards the portion of the field which was our brother Elimelech's which was given to Noemin, now returning out of the land of Moab;
and I said, I will inform thee, saying, Buy it before those that sit, and before the elders of my people: if thou wilt redeem it, redeem it, but if thou wilt not redeem it, tell me, and I shall know; for there is no one beside thee to do the office of a kinsman, and I am after thee: and he said, I am here, I will redeem it.
And Booz said, In the day of thy buying the field of the hand of Noemin and of Ruth the Moabitess the wife of the deceased, thou must also buy her, so as to raise up the name of the dead upon his inheritance.
And the kinsman said, I shall not be able to redeem it for myself, lest I mar my own inheritance; do thou redeem my right for thyself, for I shall not be able to redeem it.
And this was in former time the ordinance in Israel for redemption, and for a bargain, to confirm every word: A man loosed his shoe, and gave it to his neighbour that redeemed his right; and this was a testimony in Israel.
And the kinsman said to Booz, Buy my right for thyself: and he took off his shoe and gave it to him.
And Booz said to the elders and to all the people, Ye are this day witnesses, that I have bought all that was Elimelech's, and all that belonged to Chelaion and Maalon, of the hand of Noemin.
Moreover I have bought for myself for a wife Ruth the Moabitess, the wife of Maalon, to raise up the name of the dead upon his inheritance; so the name of the dead shall not be destroyed from among his brethren, and from the tribe of his people: ye are this day witnesses.
And all the people who were in the gate said, We are witnesses: and the elders said, The Lord make thy wife who goes into thy house, as Rachel and as Lia, who both together built the house of Israel, and wrought mightily in Ephratha, and there shall be a name to thee in Bethleem.
And let thy house be as the house of Phares, whom Thamar bore to Juda, of the seed which the Lord shall give thee of this handmaid.
And Booz took Ruth, and she became his wife, and he went in to her; and the Lord gave her conception, and she bore a son.
And the woman said to Noemin, Blessed is the Lord, who has not suffered a redeemer to fail thee this day, even to make thy name famous in Israel.
And he shall be to thee a restorer of thy soul, and one to cherish thy old age; for thy daughter-in-law which has loved thee, who is better to thee than seven sons, has born him.
And Noemin took the child and laid it in her bosom, and became a nurse to it.
And the neighbours gave it a name, saying, A son has been born to Noemin; and they called his name Obed; this is the father of Jessae the father of David.
And these are the generations of Phares: Phares begot Esrom:
Esrom begot Aram; and Aram begot Aminadab.
And Aminadab begot Naasson; and Naasson begot Salmon.
And Salmon begot Booz; and Booz begot Obed.
And Obed begot Jessae; and Jessae begot David.
Wine is an intemperate thing, and strong drink full of violence: but every fool is entangled with them.
The threat of a king differs not from the rage of a lion; and he that provokes him sins against his own soul.
It is a glory to a man to turn aside from railing; but every fool is entangled with such matters.
A sluggard when reproached is not ashamed: so also he who borrows corn in harvest.
Counsel in a man's heart is deep water; but a prudent man will draw it out.
A man is valuable, and a merciful man precious: but it is hard to find a faithful man.
He that walks blameless in justice, shall leave his children blessed.
Whenever a righteous king sits on the throne, no evil thing can stand before his presence.
Who will boast that he has a pure heart? or who will boldly say that he is pure from sins?
A large and small weight, and divers measures, are even both of them unclean before the Lord; and so is he that makes them.
A youth when in company with a godly man, will be restrained in his devices, and then his way will be straight.
The ear hears, and the eye sees: even both of them are the Lord's work.
Love not to speak ill, lest thou be cut off: open thine eyes, and be filled with bread.
A double weight is an abomination to the Lord; and a deceitful balance is not good in his sight.
A man's goings are directed of the Lord: how then can a mortal understand his ways?
It is a snare to a man hastily to consecrate some of his own property: for in that case repentance comes after vowing.
A wise king utterly crushes the ungodly, and will bring a wheel upon them.
The spirit of man is a light of the Lord, who searches the inmost parts of the belly.
Mercy and truth are a guard to a king, and will surround his throne with righteousness.
Wisdom is an ornament to young men; and grey hairs are the glory of old men.
Bruises and contusions befall bad men; and plagues shall come in the inward parts of their belly.
And Judas sent the kid of the goats by the hand of his shepherd the Odollamite, to receive the pledge from the woman; and he found her not.
And he asked the men of the place, Where is the harlot who was in Aenan by the way-side? and they said, There was no harlot here.
And he returned to Judas, and said, I have not found her; and the men of the place say, There is no harlot here.
And Judas said, Let her have them, but let us not be ridiculed; I sent this kid, but thou hast not found her.
And as they were bringing her, she sent to her father-in-law, saying, I am with child by the man whose these things are; and she said, See whose is this ring and bracelet and staff.
And Judas knew , and said, Thamar is cleared rather than I, forasmuch as I gave her not to Selom my son: and he knew her not again.
And it came to pass when she was in labour, that she also had twins in her womb.
Unto thee who dwellest in heaven have I lifted up mine eyes.
Behold, as the eyes of servants are directed to the hands of their masters, and as the eyes of a maidservant to the hands of her mistress; so our eyes are directed to the Lord our God, until he have mercy upon us.
Have pity upon us, O Lord, have pity upon us: for we are exceedingly filled with contempt.
Yea, our soul has been exceedingly filled with it: let the reproach be to them that are at ease, and contempt to the proud.
I will sing of thy mercies, O Lord, for ever: I will declare thy truth with my mouth to all generations.
For thou hast said, Mercy shall be built up for ever: thy truth shall be established in the heavens.
I made a covenant with my chosen ones, I sware unto David my servant.
I will establish thy seed for ever, and build up thy throne to all generations. Pause.
The heavens shall declare thy wonders, O Lord; and thy truth in the assembly of the saints.
For who in the heavens shall be compared to the Lord? and who shall be likened to the Lord among the sons of God?
God is glorified in the council of the saints; great and terrible toward all that are round about him.
O Lord God of hosts, who is like to thee? thou art mighty, O Lord, and thy truth is round about thee.
Thou rulest the power of the sea; and thou calmest the tumult of its waves.
Thou has brought down the proud as one that is slain; and with the arm of thy power thou has scattered thine enemies.
The heavens are thine, and the earth is thine: thou hast founded the world, and the fullness of it.
Thou hast created the north and the west: Thabor and Hermon shall rejoice in thy name.
Thine is the mighty arm: let thy hand be strengthened, let thy right hand be exalted.
Justice and judgment are the establishment of thy throne: mercy and truth shall go before thy face.
Blessed is the people that knows the joyful sound: they shall walk, O Lord, in the light of thy countenance.
And in thy name shall they rejoice all the day: and in thy righteousness shall they be exalted.
For thou art the boast of their strength; and in thy good pleasure shall our horn be exalted,
for our help is of the Lord; and of the Holy One of Israel, our king.
Then thou spokest in vision to thy children, and saidst, I have laid help on a mighty one; I have exalted one chosen out of my people.
I have found David my servant; I have anointed him by my holy mercy.
For my hand shall support him; and mine arm shall strengthen him.
The enemy shall have no advantage against him; and the son of transgression shall not hurt him again.
And I will hew down his foes before him, and put to flight those that hate him.
But my truth and my mercy shall be with him; and in my name shall his horn be exalted.
And I will set his hand in the sea, and his right hand in the rivers.
He shall call upon me, saying, Thou art my Father, my God, and the helper of my salvation.
And I will make him my first-born, higher than the kings of the earth.
I will keep my mercy for him for ever, and my covenant shall be firm with him.
And I will establish his seed for ever and ever, and his throne as the days of heaven.
If his children should forsake my law, and walk not in my judgments;
if they should profane my ordinances, and not keep my commandments;
I will visit their transgressions with a rod, and their sins with scourges.
But my mercy I will not utterly remove from him, nor wrong my truth.
Neither will I by any means profane my covenant; and I will not make void the things that proceed out of my lips.
Once have I sworn by my holiness, that I will not lie to David.
His see shall endure for ever, and his throne as the sun before me;
and as the moon that is established for ever, and as the faithful witness in heaven. Pause.
But thou hast cast off and set at nought, thou has rejected thine anointed.
Thou hast overthrown the covenant of thy servant; thou has profaned his sanctuary, casting it to the ground.
Thou hast broken down all his hedges; thou hast made his strong holds a terror.
All that go by the way have spoiled him: he is become a reproach to his neighbours.
Thou hast exalted the right hand of his enemies; thou hast made all his enemies to rejoice.
Thou hast turned back the help of his sword, and hast not helped him in the battle.
Thou hast deprived him of glory: thou hast broken down his throne to the ground.
Thou hast shortened the days of his throne: thou hast poured shame upon him. Pause.
How long, O Lord, wilt thou turn away, for ever? shall thine anger flame out as fire?
Remember what my being is: for hast thou created all the sons of men in vain?
What man is there who shall live, and not see death? shall any one deliver his soul from the hand of Hades? Pause.
Where are thine ancient mercies, O Lord, which thou swarest to David in thy truth?
Remember, O Lord, the reproach of thy servants, which I have borne in my bosom, even the reproach of many nations;
wherewith thine enemies have reviled, O Lord: wherewith they have reviled the recompense of thine anointed.
Blessed be the Lord for ever. So be it, so be it.
THE WORD AGAINST DAMASCUS. Behold, Damascus shall be taken away from among cities, and shall become a ruin;
abandoned for ever, to be a fold and resting-place for flocks, and there shall be none to go after them.
And she shall no longer be a strong place for Ephraim to flee to, and there shall no longer be a kingdom in Damascus, or a remnant of Syrians; for thou art no better than the children of Israel, even than their glory; thus saith the Lord of hosts.
There shall be in that day a failure of the glory of Jacob, and the riches of his glory shall be shaken.
And it shall be as if one should gather standing corn, and reap the grain of the ears; and it shall be as if one should gather ears in a rich valley;
and as if there should be left stubble therein, or as it were the berries of an olive tree, two or three on the topmost bough, or as if four or five should be left on their branches; thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel.
In that day a man shall trust in him that made him, and his eyes shall have respect to the Holy One of Israel.
And they shall not at all trust in their altars, nor in the works of their hands, which their fingers made; and they shall not look to the trees, nor to their abominations.
In that day thy cities shall be deserted, as the Amorites and the Evaeans deserted theirs, because of the children of Israel; and they shall be desolate.
Because thou hast forsaken God thy Saviour, and hast not been mindful of the Lord thy helper; therefore shalt thou plant a false plant, and a false seed.
In the day wherein thou shalt plant thou shalt be deceived; but if thou sow in the morning, the seed shall spring up for a crop in the day wherein thou shalt obtain an inheritance, and as a man's father, thou shalt obtain an inheritance for thy sons.
Woe to the multitude of many nations, as the swelling sea, so shall ye be confounded; and the force of many nations shall sound like water;
many nations like much water, as when much water rushes violently: and they shall drive him away, and pursue him afar, as the dust of chaff when men winnow before the wind, and as a storm whirling the dust of the wheel.
Toward evening, and there shall be grief; before the morning, and he shall not be. This is the portion of them that spoiled you, and the inheritance to them that robbed you of your inheritance.
Let God arise, and let his enemies be scattered; and let them that hate him flee from before him.
As smoke vanishes, let them vanish: as wax melts before the fire, so let the sinners perish from before God.
But let the righteous rejoice; let them exult before God: let them be delighted with joy.
Sing to God, sing praises to his name: make a way for him that rides upon the west (the Lord is his name) and exult before him. They shall be troubled before the face of him,
who is the father of the orphans, and judge of the widows: such is God in his holy place.
God settles the solitary in a house; leading forth prisoners mightily, also them that act provokingly, even them that dwell in tombs.
O God, when thou wentest forth before thy people, when thou wentest through the wilderness; Pause:
the earth quaked, yea, the heavens dropped water at the presence of the God of Sina, at the presence of the God of Israel.
O God, thou wilt grant to thine inheritance a gracious rain; for it was weary, but thou didst refresh it.
Thy creatures dwell in it: thou hast in thy goodness prepared for the poor.
The Lord God will give a word to them that preach it in a great company.
The king of the forces of the beloved, of the beloved, will even grant them for the beauty of the house to divide the spoils.
Even if ye should lie among the lots, ye shall have the wings of a dove covered with silver, and her breast with yellow gold.
When the heavenly One scatters kings upon it, they shall be made snow-white in Selmon.
The mountain of God is a rich mountain; a swelling mountain, a rich mountain.
Wherefore do ye conceive evil, ye swelling mountains? this is the mountain which God has delighted to dwell in; yea, the Lord will dwell in it for ever.
The chariots of God are ten thousand fold, thousands of rejoicing ones: the Lord is among them, in Sina, in the holy place.
Thou art gone up on high, thou hast led captivity captive, thou hast received gifts for man, yea, for they were rebellious, that thou mightest dwell among them.
Blessed be the Lord God, blessed be the Lord daily; and the God of our salvation shall prosper us. Pause.
Our God is the God of salvation; and to the Lord belong the issues from death.
But God shall crust the heads of his enemies; the hairy crown of them that go on in their trespasses.
The Lord said, I will bring again from Basan, I will bring my people again through the depths of the sea.
That thy foot may be dipped in blood, and the tongue of thy dogs be stained with that of thine enemies.
Thy goings, O God, have been seen; the goings of my God, the king, in the sanctuary.
The princes went first, next before the players on instruments, in the midst of damsels playing on timbrels.
Praise God in the congregations, the Lord from the fountains of Israel.
There is Benjamin the younger one in ecstasy, the princes of Juda their rulers, the princes of Zabulon, the princes of Nephthali.
O God, command thou thy strength: strengthen, O God, this which thou hast wrought in us.
Because of thy temple at Jerusalem shall kings bring presents to thee.
Rebuke the wild beasts of the reed: let the crowd of bulls with the heifers of the nations be rebuked, so that they who have been proved with silver may not be shut out: scatter thou the nations that wish for wars.
Ambassadors shall arrive out of Egypt; Ethiopia shall hasten to stretch out her hand readily to God.
Sing to God, ye kingdoms of the earth; sing psalms to the Lord. Pause.
Sing to God that rides on the heaven of heaven, eastward: lo, he will utter a mighty sound with his voice.
Give ye glory to God: his excellency is over Israel, and his power is in the clouds.
God is wonderful in his holy places, the God of Israel: he will give power and strength to his people: blessed be God.
And it came to pass after many days after the Lord had given Israel rest from all his enemies round about, that Joshua was old and advanced in years.
And Joshua called together all the children of Israel, and their elders, and their chiefs, and their judges, and their officers; and said to them, I am old and advanced in years.
And ye have seen all that the Lord our God has done to all these nations before us; for it is the Lord your God who has fought for you.
See, that I have given to you these nations that are left to you by lots to your tribes, all the nations beginning at Jordan; and some I have destroyed; and the boundaries shall be at the great sea westward.
And the Lord our God, he shall destroy them before us, until they utterly perish; and he shall send against them the wild beasts, until he shall have utterly destroyed them and their kings from before you; and ye shall inherit their land, as the Lord our God said to you.
Do ye therefore strive diligently to observe and do all things written in the book of the law of Moses, that ye turn not to the right hand or to the left;
that ye go not in among these nations that are left; and the names of their gods shall not be named among you, neither shall ye serve them, neither shall ye bow down to them.
But ye shall cleave to the Lord our God, as ye have done until this day.
And the Lord shall destroy them before you, even great and strong nations; and no one has stood before us until this day.
One of you has chased a thousand, for the Lord our God, he fought for you, as he said to us.
And take ye great heed to love the Lord our God.
For if ye shall turn aside and attach yourselves to these nations that are left with you, and make marriages with them, and become mingled with them and they with you,
know that the Lord will no more destroy these nations from before you; and they will be to you snares and stumbling-blocks, and nails in your heels, and darts in your eyes, until ye be destroyed from off this good land, which the Lord your God has given you.
But I hasten to go the way of death, as all that are upon the earth also do: and ye know in your heart and in your soul, that not one word has fallen to the ground of all the words which the Lord our God has spoken respecting all that concerns us; there has not one of them failed.
And it shall come to pass, that as all the good things are come upon us which the Lord God will bring upon you all the evil things, until he shall have destroyed you from off this good land, which the Lord has given you,
when ye transgress the covenant of the Lord our God, which he has charged us, and go and serve other gods, and bow down to them.
And the children of Israel continued to do evil against the Lord; and Aod was dead.
And the Lord sold the children of Israel into the hand of Jabin king of Chanaan, who ruled in Asor; and the chief of his host was Sisara, and he dwelt in Arisoth of the Gentiles.
And the children of Israel cried to the Lord, because he had nine hundred chariots of iron; and he mightily oppressed Israel twenty years.
And Debbora, a prophetess, the wife of Lapidoth, she judged Israel at that time.
And she sat under the palm-tree of Debbora between Rama and Baethel in mount Ephraim; and the children of Israel went up to her for judgment.
And Debbora sent and called Barac the son of Abineem out of Cades Nephthali, and she said to him, Has not the Lord God of Israel commanded thee? and thou shalt depart to mount Thabor, and shalt take with thyself ten thousand men of the sons of Nephthali and of the sons of Zabulon.
And I will bring to thee to the torrent of Kison Sisara the captain of the host of Jabin, and his chariots, and his multitude, and I will deliver them into thine hands.
And Barac said to her, If thou wilt go with me, I will go; and if thou wilt not go, I will not go; for I know not the day on which the Lord prospers his messenger with me.
And she said, I will surely go with thee; but know that thy honour shall not attend on the expedition on which thou goest, for the Lord shall sell Sisara into the hands of a women: and Debbora arose, and went with Barac out of Cades.
And Barac called Zabulon and Nephthali out of Cades, and there went up at his feet ten thousand men, and Debbora went up with him.
And Chaber the Kenite had removed from Caina, from the sons of Jobab the father-in-law of Moses, and pitched his tent by the oak of the covetous ones, which is near Kedes.
And it was told Sisara that Barac the son of Abineem was gone up to mount Thabor.
And Sisara summoned all his chariots, nine hundred chariots of iron and all the people with him, from Arisoth of the Gentiles to the brook of Kison.
And Debbora said to Barac, Rise up, for this is the day on which the Lord has delivered Sisara into thy hand, for the Lord shall go forth before thee: and Barac went down from mount Thabor, and ten thousand men after him.
And the Lord discomfited Sisara, and all his chariots, and all his army, with the edge of the sword before Barac: and Sisara descended from off his chariot, and fled on his feet.
And Barac pursued after the chariots and after the army, into Arisoth of the Gentiles; and the whole army of Sisara fell by the edge of the sword, there was not one left.
And Sisara fled on his feet to the tent of Jael the wife of Chaber the Kenite his friend: for there was peace between Jabin king of Asor and the house of Chaber the Kenite.
And Jael went, out to meet Sisara, and said to him, Turn aside, my lord, turn aside to me, fear not: and he turned aside to her into the tent; and she covered him with a mantle.
And Sisara said to her, Give me, I pray thee, a little water to drink, for I am thirsty: and she opened a bottle of milk, and gave him to drink, and covered him.
And Sisara said to her, Stand now by the door of the tent, and it shall come to pass if any man come to thee, and ask of thee, and say, Is there any man here? then thou shalt say, There is not.
And Jael the wife of Chaber took a pin of the tent, and took a hammer in her hand, and went secretly to him, and fastened the pin in his temple, and it went through to the earth, and he fainted away, and darkness fell upon him and he died.
And, behold, Barac was pursuing Sisara: and Jael went out to meet him, and he said to him, Come, and I will shew thee the man whom thou seekest: and he went in to her; and, behold, Sisara was fallen dead, and the pin was in his temple.
So God routed Jabin king of Chanaan in that day before the children of Israel.
And the hand of the children of Israel prevailed more and more against Jabin king of Chanaan, until they utterly destroyed Jabin king of Chanaan.
Therefore I will return, and take away my corn in its season, and my wine in its time; and I will take away my raiment and my linen clothes, so that she shall not cover her nakedness.
And now I will expose her uncleanness before her lovers, and no one shall by any means deliver her out of my hand.
And I will take away all her gladness, her feasts, and her festivals at the new moon, and her sabbaths, and all her solemn assemblies.
And I will utterly destroy her vines, and her fig-trees, all things of which she said, These are my hire which my lovers have given me: and I will make them a testimony, and the wild beasts of the field, and the birds of the sky, and the reptiles of the earth shall devour them.
Therefore, behold, I will cause her to err, and will make her as desolate, and will speak comfortably to her.
And I will giver her possessions from thence, and the valley of Achor to open her understanding: and she shall be afflicted there according to the days of her infancy, and according to the days of her coming up out of the land of Egypt.
And it shall come to pass in that day, saith the Lord, that she shall call me, My husband, and shall no longer call me Baalim.
And I will take away the names of Baalim out of her mouth, and their names shall be remembered no more at all.
And I will make for them in that day a covenant with the wild beasts of the field, and with the birds of the sky, and with the reptiles of the earth: and I will break the bow and the sword and the battle from off the earth, and will cause thee to dwell safely.
And I will betroth thee to myself for ever; yea, I will betroth thee to myself in righteousness, and in judgment, and in mercy, and in tender compassions;
and I will betroth thee to myself in faithfulness: and thou shalt know the Lord.
And it shall come to pass in that day, saith the Lord, I will hearken to the heaven, and it shall hearken to the earth;
and the earth shall hearken to the corn, and the wine, and the oil; and they shall hearken to Jezrael.
And I will sow her to me on the earth; and will love her that was not loved, and will say to that which was not my people, Thou art my people; and they shall say, Thou art the Lord my God.
And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the congregation of the children of Israel, and thou shalt say to them, Ye shall be holy; for I the Lord your God am holy.
Let every one of you reverence his father and his mother; and ye shall keep my sabbaths: I am the Lord your God.
Ye shall not follow idols, and ye shall not make to yourselves molten gods: I am the Lord your God.
And if ye will sacrifice a peace-offering to the Lord, ye shall offer it acceptable from yourselves.
In what day soever ye shall sacrifice it, it shall be eaten; and on the following day, and if any of it should be left till the third day, it shall be thoroughly burnt with fire.
And if it should be at all eaten on the third day, it is unfit for sacrifice: it shall not be accepted.
And he that eats it shall bear his iniquity, because he has profaned the holy things of the Lord; and the souls that eat it shall be destroyed from among their people.
And when ye reap the harvest of your land, ye shall not complete the reaping of your field with exactness, and thou shalt not gather that which falls from thy reaping.
And thou shalt not go over the gathering of thy vineyard, neither shalt thou gather the remaining grapes of thy vineyard: thou shalt leave them for the poor and the stranger: I am the Lord your God.
Ye shall not steal, ye shall not lie, neither shall one bear false witness as an informer against his neighbour.
And ye shall not swear unjustly by my name, and ye shall not profane the holy name of your God: I am the Lord your God.
Thou shalt not injure thy neighbour, neither do thou rob him, neither shall the wages of thy hireling remain with thee until the morning.
Thou shalt not revile the deaf, neither shalt thou put a stumbling-block in the way of the blind; and thou shalt fear the Lord thy God: I am the Lord your God.
Thou shalt not act unjustly in judgment: thou shalt not accept the person of the poor, nor admire the person of the mighty; with justice shalt thou judge thy neighbour.
Thou shalt not walk deceitfully among thy people; thou shalt not rise up against the blood of thy neighbour: I am the Lord your God.
The stranger that comes to you shall be among you as the native, and thou shalt love him as thyself; for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt: I am the Lord your God.
Ye shall not act unrighteously in judgment, in measures and weights and scales.
There shall be among you just balances and just weights and just liquid measure. I am the Lord your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt.
And ye shall keep all my law and all my ordinances, and ye shall do them: I am the Lord your God.
And it came to pass, when they had finished eating the corn which they had brought out of Egypt, that their father said to them, Go again; buy us a little food.
And Judas spoke to him, saying, The man, the lord of the country, positively testified to us, saying, Ye shall not see my face, unless your younger brother be with you.
If, then, thou send our brother with us, we will go down, and buy thee food;
but if thou send not our brother with us, we will not go: for the man spoke to us, saying, Ye shall not see my face, unless your younger brother be with you.
And the man did as Joseph said; and he brought the men into the house of Joseph.
And the men, when they perceived that they were brought into the house of Joseph, said, We are brought in because of the money that was returned in our sacks at the first; even in order to inform against us, and lay it to our charge; to take us for servants, and our asses.
And having approached the man who was over the house of Joseph, they spoke to him in the porch of the house,
And we have brought other money with us to buy food; we know not who put the money into our sacks.
And he said to them, mercifully with you; be not afraid; your God, and the God of your fathers, has given you treasures in your sacks, and I have enough of your good money. And he brought Symeon out to them.
And he brought water to wash their feet; and gave provender to their asses.
And they prepared their gifts, until Joseph came at noon, for they heard that he was going to dine there.
Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, saith God.
Speak, ye priests, to the heart of Jerusalem; comfort her, for her humiliation is accomplished, her sin is put away: for she has received of the Lord's hand double the amount of her sins.
The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make straight the paths of our God.
Every valley shall be filled, and every mountain and hill shall be brought low: and all the crooked ways shall become straight, and the rough places plains.
And the glory of the Lord shall appear, and all flesh shall see the salvation of God: for the Lord has spoken it.
The voice of one saying, Cry; and I said, What shall I cry? All flesh is grass, and all the glory of man as the flower of grass:
The grass withers, and the flower fades:
but the word of our God abides for ever.
O thou that bringest glad tidings to Zion, go up on the high mountain; lift up thy voice with strength, thou that bringest glad tidings to Jerusalem; lift it up, fear not; say unto the cities of Juda, Behold your God!
Behold the Lord! The Lord is coming with strength, and his arm is with power: behold, his reward is with him, and his work before him.
He shall tend his flock as a shepherd, and he shall gather the lambs with his arm, and shall soothe them that are with young.
Who has measured the water in his hand, and the heaven with a span, and all the earth in a handful? Who has weighed the mountains in scales, and the forests in a balance?
Who has known the mind of the Lord? and who has been his counsellor, to instruct him?
Or with whom has he taken counsel, and he has instructed him? or who has taught him judgment, or who has taught him the way of understanding;
since all the nations are counted as a drop from a bucket, and as the turning of a balance, and shall be counted as spittle?
And Libanus is not enough to burn, nor all beasts enough for a whole-burnt offering:
and all the nations are as nothing, and counted as nothing.
To whom have ye compared the Lord? and with what likeness have ye compared him?
Has not the artificer made an image, or the goldsmith having melted gold, gilt it over, and made it a similitude?
For the artificer chooses out a wood that will not rot, and will wisely enquire how he shall set up his image, and that so that it should not be moved.
Will ye not know? will ye not hear? has it not been told you of old? Have ye not known the foundations of the earth?
It is he that comprehends the circle of the earth, and the inhabitants in it are as grasshoppers; he that set up the heaven as a chamber, and stretched it out as a tent to dwell in:
he that appoints princes to rule as nothing, and has made the earth as nothing.
For they shall not plant, neither shall they sow, neither shall their root be fixed in the ground: he has blown upon them, and they are withered, and a storm shall carry them away like sticks.
Now then to whom have ye compared me, that I may be exalted? saith the Holy One.
Lift up your eyes on high, and see, who has displayed all these things? even he that brings forth his host by number: he shall call them all by name by means of his great glory, and by the power of his might: nothing has escaped thee.
For say not thou, O Jacob, and why hast thou spoken, Israel, saying, My way is hid from God, and my God has taken away my judgement, and has departed?
And now, hast thou not known? hast thou not heard? the eternal God, the God that formed the ends of the earth, shall not hunger, nor be weary, and there is no searching of his understanding.
He gives strength to the hungry, and sorrow to them that are not suffering.
For the young men shall hunger, and the youths shall be weary, and the choice men shall be powerless:
but they that wait on God shall renew their strength; they shall put forth new feathers like eagles; they shall run, and not be weary; they shall walk, and not hunger.
Tobias then answered and said, Father, I will do all things which thou hast commanded me:
But how can I receive the money, seeing I know him not?
Then he gave him the handwriting, and said unto him, Seek thee a man which may go with thee, whiles I yet live, and I will give him wages: and go and receive the money.
Therefore when he went to seek a man, he found Raphael that was an angel.
But he knew not; and he said unto him, Canst thou go with me to Rages? and knowest thou those places well?
To whom the angel said, I will go with thee, and I know the way well: for I have lodged with our brother Gabael.
Then Tobias said unto him, Tarry for me, till I tell my father.
Then he said unto him, Go and tarry not. So he went in and said to his father, Behold, I have found one which will go with me. Then he said, Call him unto me, that I may know of what tribe he is, and whether he be a trusty man to go with thee.
So he called him, and he came in, and they saluted one another.
So they were well pleased. Then said he to Tobias, Prepare thyself for the journey, and God send you a good journey. And when his son had prepared all things far the journey, his father said, Go thou with this man, and God, which dwelleth in heaven, prosper your journey, and the angel of God keep you company. So they went forth both, and the young man's dog with them.
But Anna his mother wept, and said to Tobit, Why hast thou sent away our son? is he not the staff of our hand, in going in and out before us?
Be not greedy to add money to money: but let it be as refuse in respect of our child.
For that which the Lord hath given us to live with doth suffice us.
O Lord, I have hoped in thee; let me never be ashamed: deliver me in thy righteousness and rescue me.
Incline thine ear to me; make haste to rescue me: be thou to me for a protecting God, and for a house of refuge to save me.
For thou art my strength and my refuge; and thou shalt guide me for thy name's sake, and maintain me.
Thou shalt bring me out of the snare which they have hidden for me; for thou, O Lord, art my defender.
Into thine hands I will commit my spirit: thou hast redeemed me, O Lord God of truth.
Thou has hated them that idly persist in vanities: but I have hoped in the Lord.
I will exult and be glad in thy mercy: for thou hast looked upon mine affliction; thou hast saved my soul from distresses.
And thou hast not shut me up into the hands of the enemy: thou hast set my feet in a wide place.
Pity me, O Lord, for I am afflicted: my eye is troubled with indignation, my soul and by belly.
For my life is spent with grief, and my years with groanings: my strength has been weakened through poverty, and my bones are troubled.
I became a reproach among all mine enemies, but exceedingly so to my neighbours, and a fear to mine acquaintance: they that saw me without fled from me.
I have been forgotten as a dead man out of mind: I am become as a broken vessel.
For I heard the slander of many that dwelt round about: when they were gathered together against me, they took counsel to take my life.
But I hoped in thee, O Lord: I said, Thou art my God.
My lots are in thy hands: deliver me from the hand of mine enemies,
and from them that persecute me. Make thy face to shine upon thy servant: save me in thy mercy.
O Lord, let me not be ashamed, for I have called upon thee: let the ungodly be ashamed, and brought down to Hades.
Let the deceitful lips become dumb, which speak iniquity against the righteous with pride and scorn.
How abundant is the multitude of thy goodness, O Lord, which thou hast laid up for them that fear thee! thou hast wrought it out for them that hope on thee, in the presence of the sons of men.
Thou wilt hide them in the secret of thy presence from the vexation of man: thou wilt screen them in a tabernacle from the contradiction of tongues.
Blessed be the Lord: for he has magnified his mercy in a fortified city.
But I said in my extreme fear, I am cast out from the sight of thine eyes: therefore thou didst hearken, O Lord, to the voice of my supplication when I cried to thee.
Love the Lord, all ye his saints: for the Lord seeks for truth, and renders a reward to them that deal very proudly.
Be of good courage, and let your heart be strengthened, all ye that hope in the Lord.
And they departed from Aelim, and all the congregation of the children of Israel came to the wilderness of Sin, which is between Aelim and Sina; and on the fifteenth day, in the second month after their departure from the land of Egypt,
all the congregation of the children of Israel murmured against Moses and Aaron.
And the children of Israel said to them, Would we had died smitten by the Lord in the land of Egypt, when we sat by the flesh-pots, and ate bread to satiety! for ye have brought us out into this wilderness, to slay all this congregation with hunger.
And Moses and Aaron said to all the congregation of the children of Israel, At even ye shall know that the Lord has brought you out of the land of Egypt;
and in the morning ye shall see the glory of the Lord, inasmuch as he hears your murmuring against God; and who are we, that ye continue to murmur against us?
And Moses said, This shall be when the Lord gives you in the evening flesh to eat, and bread in the morning to satiety, because the Lord has heard your murmuring, which ye murmur against us: and what are we? for your murmuring is not against us, but against God.
And Moses said to Aaron, Say to all the congregation of the children of Israel, Come near before God; for he has heard your murmuring.
And when Aaron spoke to all the congregation of the children of Israel, and they turned toward the wilderness, then the glory of the Lord appeared in a cloud.
And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying,
I have heard the murmuring of the children of Israel: speak to them, saying, Towards evening ye shall eat flesh, and in the morning ye shall be satisfied with bread; and ye shall know that I am the Lord your God.
And it was evening, and quails came up and covered the camp:
in the morning it came to pass as the dew ceased round about the camp, that, behold, on the face of the wilderness was a small thing like white coriander seed, as frost upon the earth.
And when the children of Israel saw it, they said one to another, What is this? for they knew not what it was; and Moses said to them,
This is the bread which the Lord has given you to eat. This is that which the Lord has appointed: gather of it each man for his family, a homer for each person, according to the number of your souls, gather each of you with his fellow-lodgers.
And the children of Israel did so, and gathered some much and some less.
And having measured the homer full, he that gathered much had nothing over, and he that had gathered less had no lack; each gathered according to the need of those who belonged to him.
And Moses said to them, Let no man leave of it till the morning.
But they did not hearken to Moses, but some left of it till the morning; and it bred worms and stank: and Moses was irritated with them.
And they gathered it every morning, each man what he needed, and when the sun waxed hot it melted.
And it came to pass on the sixth day, they gathered double what was needed, two homers for one man; and all the chiefs of the synagogue went in and reported it to Moses.
And Moses said to them, Is not this the word which the Lord spoke? To-morrow is the sabbath, a holy rest to the Lord: bake that ye will bake, and seethe that ye will seethe, and all that is over leave to be laid by for the morrow.
And they left of it till the morning, as Moses commanded them; and it stank not, neither was there a worm in it.
And Moses said, Eat that to-day, for to-day is a sabbath to the Lord: it shall not be found in the plain.
Six days ye shall gather it, and on the seventh day is a sabbath, for there shall be none on that day.
And it came to pass on the seventh day that some of the people went forth to gather, and found none.
And the Lord said to Moses, How long are ye unwilling to hearken to my commands and my law?
See, for the Lord has given you this day as the sabbath, therefore he has given you on the sixth day the bread of two days: ye shall sit each of you in your houses; let no one go forth from his place on the seventh day.
And the people kept sabbath on the seventh day.
And the children of Israel called the name of it Man; and it was as white coriander seed, and the taste of it as a wafer with honey.
And Moses said, This is the thing which the Lord hath commanded, Fill an homer with manna, to be laid up for your generations; that they may see the bread which ye ate in the wilderness, when the Lord led you forth out of the land of Egypt.
And Moses said to Aaron, Take a golden pot, and cast into it one full homer of manna; and thou shalt lay it up before God, to be kept for your generations,
as the Lord commanded Moses: and Aaron laid it up before the testimony to be kept.
And the children of Israel ate manna forty years, until they came to the land they ate the manna, until they came to the region of Phoenicia.
Now the homer was the tenth part of three measures.
The Mighty One shall thunder wonderfully with his voice: for he has done great things which we knew not;
commanding the snow, Be thou upon the earth, and the stormy rain, and the storm of the showers of his might.
He seals up the hand of every man, that every man may know his own weakness.
And the wild beasts come in under the covert, and rest in their lair.
Troubles come on out of the secret chambers, and cold from the mountain-tops.
And from the breath of the Mighty One he will send frost; and he guides the water in whatever way he pleases.
And he will carry round the encircling clouds by his governance, to perform their works: whatsoever he shall command them,
Hearken to this, O Job: stand still, and be admonished of the power of the Lord.
We know that god has disposed his works, having made light out of darkness.
And he knows the divisions of the clouds, and the signal overthrows of the ungodly.
But thy robe is warm, and there is quiet upon the land.
Wherefore teach me, what shall we say to him? and let us cease from saying much.
Have I a book or a scribe my me, that I may stand and put man to silence?
But the light is not visible to all: it shines afar off in the heavens, as that which is from him in the clouds.
From the north come the clouds shining like gold: in these great are the glory and honour of the Almighty;
and we do not find another his equal in strength: as for him that judges justly, dost thou not think that he listens?
Wherefore men shall fear him; and the wise also in heart shall fear him.
Then Tobit wrote a prayer of rejoicing, and said, Blessed be God that liveth for ever, and blessed be his kingdom.
For he doth scourge, and hath mercy: he leadeth down to hell, and bringeth up again: neither is there any that can avoid his hand.
Confess him before the Gentiles, ye children of Israel: for he hath scattered us among them.
There declare his greatness, and extol him before all the living: for he is our Lord, and he is the God our Father for ever.
And he will scourge us for our iniquities, and will have mercy again, and will gather us out of all nations, among whom he hath scattered us.
If ye turn to him with your whole heart, and with your whole mind, and deal uprightly before him, then will he turn unto you, and will not hide his face from you. Therefore see what he will do with you, and confess him with your whole mouth, and praise the Lord of might, and extol the everlasting King. In the land of my captivity do I praise him, and declare his might and majesty to a sinful nation. O ye sinners, turn and do justice before him: who can tell if he will accept you, and have mercy on you?
I will extol my God, and my soul shall praise the King of heaven, and shall rejoice in his greatness.
Let all men speak, and let all praise him for his righteousness.
O Jerusalem, the holy city, he will scourge thee for thy children's works, and will have mercy again on the sons of the righteous.
Give praise to the Lord, for he is good: and praise the everlasting King, that his tabernacle may be builded in thee again with joy, and let him make joyful there in thee those that are captives, and love in thee for ever those that are miserable.
Many nations shall come from far to the name of the Lord God with gifts in their hands, even gifts to the King of heaven; all generations shall praise thee with great joy.
Cursed are all they which hate thee, and blessed shall all be which love thee for ever.
Rejoice and be glad for the children of the just: for they shall be gathered together, and shall bless the Lord of the just.
O blessed are they which love thee, for they shall rejoice in thy peace: blessed are they which have been sorrowful for all thy scourges; for they shall rejoice for thee, when they have seen all thy glory, and shall be glad for ever.
Let my soul bless God the great King.
For Jerusalem shall be built up with sapphires and emeralds, and precious stone: thy walls and towers and battlements with pure gold.
And the streets of Jerusalem shall be paved with beryl and carbuncle and stones of Ophir.
And all her streets shall say, Alleluia; and they shall praise him, saying, Blessed be God, which hath extolled it for ever.
Blessed is the man that does these things, and the man that holds by them, and keeps the sabbaths from profaning them, and keeps his hands from doing unrighteousness.
Let not the stranger who attaches himself to the Lord, say, Surely the Lord will separate me from his people: and let not the eunuch say, I am a dry tree.
Thus saith the Lord to the eunuchs, as many as shall keep my sabbaths, and choose the things which I take pleasure in, and take hold of my covenant;
I will give to them in my house and within my walls an honourable place, better than sons and daughters: I will give them an everlasting name, and it shall not fail.
And I will give it to the strangers that attach themselves to the Lord, to serve him, and to love the name of the Lord, to be to him servants and handmaids; and as for all that keep my sabbaths from profaning them, and that take hold of my covenant;
I will bring them to my holy mountain, and gladden them in my house of prayer: their whole-burnt-offerings and their sacrifices shall be acceptable upon mine altar; for my house shall be called a house of prayer for all nations,
saith the Lord that gathers the dispersed of Israel; for I will gather to him a congregation.
All ye beasts of the field, come, devour, all ye beasts of the forest.
See how they are all blinded: they have not known; they are dumb dogs that will not bark; dreaming of rest, loving to slumber.
Yea, they are insatiable dogs, that know not what it is to be filled, and they are wicked, having no understanding: all have followed their own ways, each according to his will.
But Job answered and said,
Hear ye, hear ye my words, that I may not have this consolation from you.
Raise me, and I will speak; then ye shall not laugh me to scorn.
What! is my reproof of man? and why should I not be angry?
Look upon me, and wonder, laying your hand upon your cheek.
For even when I remember, I am alarmed, and pains seize my flesh.
Wherefore do the ungodly live, and grow old even in wealth?
Their seed is according to their desire, and their children are in their sight.
Their houses are prosperous, neither have they any where cause for fear, neither is there a scourge from the Lord upon them.
Their cow does not cast her calf, and their beast with young is safe, and does not miscarry.
And they remain as an unfailing flock, and their children play before them, taking up the psaltery and harp;
and they rejoice at the voice of a song.
And they spend their days in wealth, and fall asleep in the rest of the grave.
Yet such a man says to the Lord, Depart from me; I desire not to know thy ways.
For their good things were in their hands, but he regards not the works of the ungodly.
Nevertheless, the lamp of the ungodly also shall be put out, and destruction shall come upon them, and pangs of vengeance shall seize them.
And they shall be as chaff before the wind, or as dust which the storm has taken up.
Let his substance fail to supply his children: God shall recompense him, and he shall know it.
Let his eyes see his own destruction, and let him not be saved by the Lord.
For his desire is in his house with him, and the number of his months has been suddenly cut off.
Is it not the Lord who teaches understanding and knowledge? and does not he judge murders?
And another dies in bitterness of soul, not eating any good thing.
But they lie down in the earth together, and corruption covers them.
So I know you, that ye presumptuously attack me:
How then do ye comfort me in vain? whereas I have no rest from your molestation.
And it was told David, saying, behold, the Philistines war in Keila, and they rob, they trample on the threshing-floors.
And David enquired of the Lord, saying, Shall I go and smite these Philistines? And the Lord said, Go, and thou shalt smite these Philistines, and shalt save Keila.
And the men of David said to him, Behold, we are afraid here in Judea; and how shall it be if we go to Keila? Shall we go after the spoils of the Philistines?
And David enquired yet again of the Lord; and the Lord answered him, and said to him, Arise and go down to Keila, for I will deliver the Philistines into thy hands.
So David and his men with him went to Keila, and fought with the Philistines; and they fled from before him, and he carried off their cattle, and smote them with a great slaughter, and David rescued the inhabitants of Keila.
And it came to pass when Abiathar the son of Achimelech fled to David, that he went down with David to Keila, having and ephod in his hand.
And it was told Saul that David was come to Keila: and Saul said, God has sold him into my hands, for he is shut up, having entered into a city that has gates and bars.
And Saul charged all the people to go down to war to Keila, to besiege David and his men.
And David knew that Saul spoke openly of mischief against him: and David said to Abiathar the priest, Bring the ephod of the Lord.
And David said, Lord God of Israel, thy servant has indeed heard, that Saul seeks to come against Keila to destroy the city on my account.
Will the place be shut up? And now will Saul come down, as thy servant has heard? Lord God of Israel, tell thy servant.
And the Lord said, It will be shut up.
And David arose, and the men with him, in number about four hundred, and they went forth from Keila, and went whithersoever they could go: and it was told Saul that David had escaped from Keila, and he forbore to come.
And he dwelt in Maserem in the wilderness, in the narrow passes; and dwelt in the wilderness in mount Ziph, in the dry country. And Saul sought him continually, but the Lord delivered him not into his hands.
And David perceived that Saul went forth to seek David; and David was in the dry mountain in the New Ziph.
And Jonathan son of Saul rose, and went to David to Caene, and strengthened his hands in the Lord.
And he said to him, Fear not, for the hand of Saul my father shall not find thee; and thou shalt be king over Israel, and I shall be second to thee; and Saul my father knows it.
So they both made a covenant before the Lord; and David dwelt in Caene, and Jonathan went to his home.
And the Ziphites came up out of the dry country to Saul to the hill, saying, Behold, is not David hidden with us in Messara, in the narrows in Caene in the hill of Echela, which is on the right of Jessaemon?
And now according to all the king's desire to come down, let him come down to us; they have shut him up into the hands of the king.
And Saul said to them, Blessed be ye of the Lord, for ye have been grieved on my account.
Go, I pray you, and make preparations yet, and notice his place where his foot shall be, quickly, in that place which ye spoke of, lest by any means he should deal craftily.
Take notice, then, and learn, and I will go with you; and it shall come to pass that if he is in the land, I will search him out among all the thousands of Juda.
And the Ziphites arose, and went before Saul: and David and his men were in the wilderness of Maon, westward, to the right of Jessaemon.
And Saul and his men went to seek him: and they brought word to David, and he went down to the rock that was in the wilderness of Maon: and Saul heard, and followed after David to the wilderness of Maon.
And Saul and his men go on one side of the mountain, and David and his men are on the other side of the mountain: and David was hiding himself to escape from Saul: and Saul and his men encamped against David and his men, in order to take them.
And there came a messenger to Saul, saying, Haste thee, and come hither, for the Philistines have invaded the land.
So Saul returned from following after David, and went to meet the Philistines: therefore that place was called The divided Rock.
The Lord is my light and my Saviour; whom shall I fear? the Lord is the defender of my life; of whom shall I be afraid?
When evil-doers drew nigh against me to eat up my flesh, my persecutors and mine enemies, they fainted and fell.
Though an army should set itself in array against me, my heart shall not be afraid: though war should rise up against me, in this am I confident.
One thing have I asked of the Lord, this will I earnestly seek: that I should dwell in the house of the Lord, all the days of my life, that I should behold the fair beauty of the Lord, and survey his temple.
For in the day of mine afflictions he hid me in his tabernacle: he sheltered me in the secret of his tabernacle; he set me up on a rock.
And now, behold, he has lifted up mine head over mine enemies: I went round and offered in his tabernacle the sacrifice of joy; I will sing even sing psalms to the Lord.
Hear, O Lord, my voice which I have uttered aloud: pity me, and hearken to me.
My heart said to thee, I have diligently sought thy face: thy face, O Lord, I will seek.
Turn not thy face away from me, turn not thou away from thy servant in anger: be thou my helper, forsake me not; and, O God my Saviour, overlook me not.
For my father and my mother have forsaken me, but the Lord has taken me to himself.
Teach me, O Lord, in thy way, and guide me in a right path, because of mine enemies.
Deliver me not over to the desire of them that afflict me; for unjust witnesses have risen up against me, and injustice has lied within herself.
I believe that I shall see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living.
Wait on the Lord: be of good courage, and let thy heart be strengthened: yea wait on the Lord.
And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying,
Charge the children of Israel, and thou shalt say to them, Ye are entering into the land of Chanaan: it shall be to you for an inheritance, the land of Chanaan with its boundaries.
And your southern side shall be from the wilderness of Sin to the border of Edom, and your border southward shall extend on the side of the salt sea eastward.
And your border shall go round you from the south to the ascent of Acrabin, and shall proceed by Ennac, and the going forth of it shall be southward to Cades Barne, and it shall go forth to the village of Arad, and shall proceed by Asemona.
And the border shall compass from Asemona to the river of Egypt, and the sea shall be the termination.
And ye shall have your border on the west, the great sea shall be the boundary: this shall be to you the border on the west.
And this shall be your northern border; from the great sea ye shall measure to yourselves, by the side of the mountain.
And ye shall measure to yourselves the mountain from mount Hor at the entering in to Emath, and the termination of it shall be the coasts of Saradac.
And the border shall go out to Dephrona, and its termination shall be at Arsenain; this shall be your border from the north.
And ye shall measure to yourselves the eastern border from Arsenain to Sepphamar.
And the border shall go down from Sepphamar to Bela eastward to the fountains, and the border shall go down from Bela behind the sea Chenereth eastward.
And the border shall go down to Jordan, and the termination shall be the salt sea; this shall be your land and its borders round about.
And Moses charged the children of Israel, saying, This is the land which ye shall inherit by lot, even as the Lord commanded us to give it to the nine tribes and the half-tribe of Manasse.
The vision which Esaias the son of Amos saw, which he saw against Juda, and against Jerusalem, in the reign of Ozias, and Joatham, and Achaz, and Ezekias, who reigned over Judea.
Hear, O heaven, and hearken, O earth: for the Lord has spoken, saying, I have begotten and reared up children, but they have rebelled against me.
The ox knows his owner, and the ass his master's crib: but Israel does not know me, and the people has not regarded me.
Ah sinful nation, a people full of sins, an evil seed, lawless children: ye have forsaken the Lord, and provoked the Holy One of Israel.
Why should ye be smitten any more, transgressing more and more? the whole head is pained, and the whole heart sad.
From the feet to the head, there is no soundness in them; neither wound, nor bruise, nor festering ulcer are healed: it is not possible to apply a plaister, nor oil, nor bandages.
Your land is desolate, your cities burned with fire: your land, strangers devour it in your presence, and it is made desolate, overthrown by strange nations.
The daughter of Sion shall be deserted as a tent in a vineyard, and as a storehouse of fruits in a garden of cucumbers, as a besieged city.
And if the Lord of Sabaoth had not left us a seed, we should have been as Sodom, and we should have been made like Gomorrha.
Hear the word of the Lord, ye rulers of Sodoma; attend to the law of God, thou people of Gomorrha.
Of what value to me is the abundance of your sacrifices? saith the Lord: I am full of whole-burnt-offerings of rams; and I delight not in the fat of lambs, and the blood of bulls and goats:
neither shall ye come with these to appear before me; for who has required these things at your hands? Ye shall no more tread my court.
Though ye bring fine flour, it is vain; incense is an abomination to me; I cannot bear your new moons, and your sabbaths, and the great day;
your fasting, and rest from work, your new moons also, and your feasts my soul hates: ye have become loathsome to me; I will no more pardon your sins.
When ye stretch forth your hands, I will turn away mine eyes from you: and though ye make many supplications, I will not hearken to you; for your hands are full of blood.
Wash you, be clean; remove your iniquities from your souls before mine eyes; cease from your iniquities;
learn to do well; diligently seek judgment, deliver him that is suffering wrong, plead for the orphan, and obtain justice for the widow.
And come, let us reason together, saith the Lord: and though your sins be as purple, I will make them white as snow; and though they be as scarlet, I will make them white as wool.
And if ye be willing, and hearken to me, ye shall eat the good of the land:
but if ye be not willing, nor hearken to me, a sword shall devour you: for the mouth of the Lord has spoken this.
How has the faithful city Sion, once full of judgment, become a harlot! wherein righteousness lodged, but now murderers.
Your silver is worthless, thy wine merchants mix the wine with water.
Thy princes are rebellious, companions of thieves, loving bribes, seeking after rewards; not pleading for orphans, and not heeding the cause of widows.
Therefore thus saith the Lord, the Lord of hosts, Woe to the mighty men of Israel; for my wrath shall not cease against mine adversaries, and I will execute judgment on mine enemies.
And I will bring my hand upon thee, and purge thee completely, and I will destroy the rebellious, and will take away from thee all transgressors.
And I will establish thy judges as before, and thy counsellors as at the beginning: and afterward thou shalt be called the city of righteousness, the faithful mother-city of Sion.
For her captives shall be saved with judgment, and with mercy.
And the transgressors and the sinners shall be crushed together, and they that forsake the Lord shall be utterly consumed.
For they shall be ashamed of their idols, which they delighted in, and they are made ashamed of the gardens which they coveted.
For they shall be as a turpentine tree that has cast its leaves, and as a garden that has no water.
And their strength shall be as a thread of tow, and their works as sparks, and the transgressors and the sinners shall be burnt up together, and there shall be none to quench them.
Praise ye the name of the Lord; praise the Lord, ye his servants,
who stand in the house of the Lord, in the courts of the house of our God.
Praise ye the Lord; for the Lord is good: sing praises to his name; for it is good.
For the Lord has chosen Jacob for himself, and Israel for his peculiar treasure.
For I know that the Lord is great, and our Lord is above all gods;
all that the Lord willed, he did in heaven, and on the earth, in the sea, and in all deeps.
Who brings up clouds from the extremity of the earth: he has made lightnings for the rain: he brings winds out of his treasures.
Who smote the first-born of Egypt, both of man and beast.
He sent signs and wonders into the midst of thee, O Egypt, on Pharao, and on all his servants.
Who smote many nations, and slew mighty kings;
Seon king of the Amorites, and Og king of Basan, and all the kingdoms of Chanaan:
and gave their land for an inheritance, an inheritance to Israel his people.
O Lord, thy name endures for ever, and thy memorial to all generations.
For the Lord shall judge his people, and comfort himself concerning his servants.
The idols of the heathen are silver and gold, the works of men's hands.
They have a mouth, but they cannot speak; they have eyes, but they cannot see;
they have ears, but they cannot hear; for there is no breath in their mouth.
Let those who make them be made like to them; and all those who trust in them.
O house of Israel, bless ye the Lord: O house of Aaron, bless ye the Lord:
O house of Levi, bless ye the Lord: ye that fear the Lord, bless the Lord.
Blessed in Sion be the Lord, who dwells in Jerusalem.
O God, give thy judgment to the king, and thy righteousness to the king's son;
that he may judge thy people with righteousness, and thy poor with judgment.
Let the mountains and the hills raise peace to thy people:
he shall judge the poor of the people in righteousness, and save the children of the needy; and shall bring low the false accuser.
And he shall continue as long as the sun, and before the moon for ever.
He shall come down as rain upon a fleece; and as drops falling upon the earth.
In his days shall righteousness spring up; and abundance of peace till the moon be removed.
And he shall have dominion from sea to sea, and from the river to the ends of the earth.
The Ethiopians shall fall down before him; and his enemies shall lick the dust.
The kings of Tharsis, and the isles, shall bring presents: the kings of the Arabians and Saba shall offer gifts.
And all kings shall worship him; all the Gentiles shall serve him.
For he has delivered the poor from the oppressor; and the needy who had no helper.
He shall spare the poor and needy, and shall deliver the souls of the needy.
He shall redeem their souls from usury and injustice: and their name shall be precious before him.
And he shall live, and there shall be given him of the gold of Arabia: and men shall pray for him continually; and all the day shall they praise him.
There shall be an establishment on the earth on the tops of the mountains: the fruit thereof shall be exalted above Libanus, and they of the city shall flourish as grass of the earth.
Let his name be blessed for ever: his name shall endure longer than the sun: and all the tribes of the earth shall be blessed in him: all nations shall call him blessed.
Blessed is the Lord God of Israel, who alone does wonders.
And blessed is his glorious name for ever, even for ever and ever: and all the earth shall be filled with his glory. So be it, so be it.
And David passed on a little way from Ros; and, behold, Siba the servant of Memphibosthe came to meet him; and he had a couple of asses laden, and upon them two hundred loaves, and a hundred bunches of raisins, and a hundred cakes of dates, and bottle of wine.
And the king said to Siba, What meanest thou by these? and Siba, said, The asses are for the household of the king to sit upon, and the loaves and the dates are for the young men to eat, and the wine is for them that are faint in the wilderness to drink.
And the king said, And where is the son of thy master? and Siba said to the king, Behold, he remains in Jerusalem; for he said, To-day shall the house of Israel restore to me the kingdom of my father.
And the king said to Siba, Behold, all Memphibosthe's property is thine. And Siba did obeisance and said, My lord, O king, let me find grace in thine eyes.
And king David came to Baurim; and, behold, there came out from thence a man of the family of the house of Saul, and his name was Semei the son of Gera. He came forth and cursed as he went,
and cast stones at David, and at all the servants of king David: and all the people and all the mighty men were on the right and left hand of the king.
And thus Semei said when he cursed him, Go out, go out, thou bloody man, and man of sin.
The Lord has returned upon thee all the blood of the house of Saul, because thou hast reigned in his stead; and the Lord has given the kingdom into the hand of Abessalom thy son: and, behold, thou art taken in thy mischief, because thou art a bloody man.
And Abessa the son of Saruia said to the king, Why does this dead dog curse my lord the king? let me go over now and take off his head.
And the king said, What have I to do with you, ye sons of Saruia? even let him alone, and so let him curse, for the Lord has told him to curse David: and who shall say, Why hast thou done thus?
And David said to Abessa and to all his servants, Behold, my son who came forth out of my bowels seeks my life; still more now may the son of Benjamin: let him curse, because the Lord has told him.
If by any means the Lord may look on my affliction, thus shall he return me good for his cursing this day.
And David and all the men with him went on the way: and Semei went by the side of the hill next to him, cursing as he went, and casting stones at him, and sprinkling him with dirt.
And the king, and all the people with him, came away and refreshed themselves there.
And Abessalom and all the men of Israel went into Jerusalem, and Achitophel with him.
And it came to pass when Chusi the chief friend of David came to Abessalom, that Chusi said to Abessalom, Let the king live.
And Abessalom said to Chusi, Is this thy kindness to thy friend? why wentest thou not forth with thy friend?
And Chusi said to Abessalom, Nay, but following whom the Lord, and this people, and all Israel have chosen, his will I be, and with him I will dwell.
And again, whom shall I serve? should I not in the presence of his son? As I served in the sight of thy father, so will I be in thy presence.
And Abessalom said to Achitophel, Deliberate among yourselves concerning what we should do.
And Achitophel said to Abessalom, Go in to thy father's concubines, whom he left to keep his house; and all Israel shall hear that thou hast dishonoured thy father; and the hands of all that are with thee shall be strengthened.
And they pitched a tent for Abessalom on the roof, and Abessalom went in to his father's concubines in the sight of all Israel.
And the counsel of Achitophel, which he counselled in former days, was as if one should enquire of the word of God: so was all the counsel of Achitophel both to David and also to Abessalom.
Assur shall never save us; we will not mount on horseback; we will no longer say to the works of our hands, Our gods. He who is in thee shall pity the orphan.
I will restore their dwellings, I will love them truly: for he has turned away my wrath from him.
I will be as dew to Israel: he shall bloom as the lily, and cast forth his roots as Libanus.
His branches shall spread, and he shall be as a fruitful olive, and his smell shall be as the smell of Libanus.
They shall return, and dwell under his shadow: they shall live and be satisfied with corn, and he shall flower as a vine: his memorial shall be to Ephraim as the wine of Libanus.
And the men of Ephraim assembled themselves, and passed on to the north, and said to Jephthae, Wherefore didst thou go over to fight with the children of Ammon, and didst not call us to go with thee? we will burn thy house over thee with fire.
And Jephthae said to them, I and my people and the children of Ammon were very much engaged in war; and I called for you, and ye did not save me out of their hand.
And I saw that thou wert no helper, and I put my life in my hand, and passed on to the sons of Ammon; and the Lord delivered them into my hand: and wherefore are ye come up against me this day to fight with me?
And Jephthae gathered all the men of Galaad, and fought with Ephraim; and the men of Galaad smote Ephraim, because they that were escaped of Ephraim said, Ye are of Galaad in the midst of Ephraim and in the midst of Manasse.
And Galaad took the fords of Jordan before Ephraim; and they that escaped of Ephraim said to them, Let us go over: and the men of Galaad said, Art thou an Ephrathite? and he said, No.
Then they said to him, Say now Stachys; and he did not rightly pronounce it so: and they took him, and slew him at the fords of Jordan; and there fell at that time of Ephraim two and forty thousand.
And Jephthae judged Israel six years; and Jephthae the Galaadite died, and was buried in his city Galaad.
And after him Abaissan of Bethleem judged Israel.
And he had thirty sons, and thirty daughters, whom he sent forth; and he brought in thirty daughters for his sons from without; and he judged Israel seven years.
And Abaissan died, and was buried in Bethleem.
And after him Aelom of Zabulon judged Israel ten years.
And Aelom of Zabulon died, and was buried in Aelom in the land of Zabulon.
And after him Abdon the son of Ellel, the Pharathonite, judged Israel.
And he had forty sons, and thirty grandsons, that rode upon seventy colts: and he judged Israel eight years.
And Abdon the son of Ellel, the Pharathonite, died, and was buried in Pharathon in the land of Ephraim in the mount of Amalec.
And Achitophel said to Abessalom, Let me now choose out for myself twelve thousand men, and I will arise and follow after David this night:
and I will come upon him when he is weary and weak-handed, and I will strike him with terror; and all the people with him shall flee, and I will smite the king only of all.
And I will bring back all the people to thee, as a bride returns to her husband: only thou seekest the life of one man, and all the people shall have peace.
And the saying was right in the eyes of Abessalom, and in the eyes of all the elders of Israel.
And Abessalom said, Call now also Chusi the Arachite, and let us hear what is in his mouth, even in his also.
And Chusi went in to Abessalom, and Abessalom spoke to him, saying, After this manner spoke Achitophel: shall we do according to his word? but if not, do thou speak.
And Chusi said to Abessalom, This counsel which Achitophel has counselled this one time is not good.
And Chusi said, Thou knowest thy father and his men, that they are very mighty, and bitter in their spirit, as a bereaved bear in the field, and as a wild boar in the plain: and thy father is a man of war, and will not give the people rest.
For, behold, he is now hidden in one of the hills or in some other place: and it shall come to pass when he falls upon them at the beginning, that some one will certainly hear, and say, There has been a slaughter among the people that follow after Abessalom.
Then even he that is strong, whose heart is as the heart of a lion, it shall utterly melt: for all Israel knows that thy father is mighty, and they that are with him are mighty men.
For thus I have surely given counsel, that all Israel be generally gathered to thee from Dan even to Bersabee, as the sand that is upon the sea-shore for multitude: and that thy presence go in the midst of them.
And we will come upon him in one of the places where we shall find him, and we will encamp against him, as the dew falls upon the earth; and we will not leave of him and of his men so much as one.
And if he shall have taken refuge with his army in a city, then shall all Israel take ropes to that city, and we will draw it even into the river, that there may not be left there even a stone.
And Abessalom, and all the men of Israel said, The counsel of Chusi the Arachite is better than the counsel of Achitophel. For the Lord ordained to disconcert the good counsel of Achitophel, that the Lord might bring all evil upon Abessalom.
And Chusi the Arachite said to Sadoc and Abiathar the priests, Thus and thus Achitophel counselled Abessalom and the elders of Israel; and thus and thus have I counselled.
And now send quickly and report to David, saying, Lodge not this night in Araboth of the wilderness: even go and make haste, lest one swallow up the king, and all the people with him.
And Jonathan and Achimaas stood by the well of Rogel, and a maid-servant went and reported to them, and they go and tell king David; for they might not be seen to enter into the city.
But a young man saw them and told Abessalom: and the two went quickly, and entered into the house of a man in Baurim; and he had a well in his court, and they went down into it.
And a woman took a covering, and spread it over the mouth of the well, and spread out ground corn upon it to dry, and the thing was not known.
And the servants of Abessalom came to the woman into the house, and said, Where are Achimaas and Jonathan? and the woman said to them, They are gone a little way beyond the water. And they sought and found them not, and returned to Jerusalem.
And it came to pass after they were gone, that they came up out of the pit, and went on their way; and reported to king David, and said to David, Arise ye and go quickly over the water, for thus has Achitophel counselled concerning you.
And David rose up and all the people with him, and they passed over Jordan till the morning light; there was not one missing who did not pass over Jordan.
And Achitophel saw that his counsel was not followed, and he saddled his ass, and rose and departed to his house into his city; and he gave orders to his household, and hanged himself, and died, and was buried in the sepulchre of his father.
And David passed over to Manaim: and Abessalom crossed over Jordan, he and all the men of Israel with him.
And Abessalom appointed Amessai in the room of Joab over the host. And Amessai was the son of a man whose name was Jether of Jezrael: he went in to Abigaia the daughter of Naas, the sister of Saruia the mother of Joab.
And all Israel and Abessalom encamped in the land of Galaad.
And it came to pass when David came to Manaim, that Uesbi the son of Naas of Rabbath of the sons of Ammon, and Machir son of Amiel of Lodabar, and Berzelli the Galaadite of Rogellim,
brought ten embroidered beds, (with double coverings,) and ten caldrons, and earthenware, and wheat, and barley, and flour, and meal, and beans, and pulse,
and honey, and butter, and sheep, and cheeses of kine: and they brought them to David and to his people with him to eat; for one said, The people is faint and hungry and thirsty in the wilderness.
And the children of Israel yet again committed iniquity before the Lord; and the Lord delivered them into the hand of the Phylistines forty years.
And there was a man of Saraa, of the family of the kindred of Dan, and his name was Manoe, and his wife was barren, and bore not.
And an angel of the Lord appeared to the woman, and said to her, Behold, thou art barren and hast not born; yet thou shalt conceive a son.
And now be very cautious, and drink no wine nor strong drink, and eat no unclean thing;
for behold, thou art with child, and shalt bring forth a son; and there shall come no razor upon his head, for the child shall be a Nazarite to God from the womb; and he shall begin to save Israel from the hand of the Phylistines.
And the woman went in, and spoke to her husband, saying, A man of God came to me, and his appearance was as of an angel of God, very dreadful; and I did not ask him whence he was, and he did not tell me his name.
And he said to me, Behold, thou art with child, and shalt bring forth a son; and now drink no wine nor strong drink, and eat no unclean thing; for the child shall be holy to God from the womb until the day of his death.
And Manoe prayed to the Lord and said, I pray thee, O Lord my lord, concerning the man of God whom thou sentest; let him now come to us once more, and teach us what we shall do to the child about to be born.
And the Lord heard the voice of Manoe, and the angel of God came yet again to the woman; and she sat in the field, and Manoe her husband was not with her.
And the woman hasted, and ran, and brought word to her husband, and said to him, Behold the man who came in the other day to me has appeared to me.
And Manoe arose and followed his wife, and came to the man, and said to him, Art thou the man that spoke to the woman? and the angel said, I am.
And Manoe said, Now shall thy word come to pass: what shall be the ordering of the child, and our dealings with him?
And the angel of the Lord said to Manoe, Of all things concerning which I spoke to the woman, she shall beware.
She shall eat of nothing that comes of the vine yielding wine, and let her not drink wine or strong liquor, and let her not eat anything unclean: all things that I have charged her she shall observe.
And Manoe said to the angel of the Lord, Let us detain thee here, and prepare before thee a kid of the goats.
And the angel of the Lord said to Manoe, If thou shouldest detain me, I will not eat of thy bread; and if thou wouldest offer a whole-burnt-offering, to the Lord thou shalt offer it: for Manoe knew not that he was an angel of the Lord.
And Manoe said to the angel of the Lord, What is thy name, that when thy word shall come to pass, we may glorify thee?
And the angel of the Lord said to him, Why dost thou thus ask after my name; whereas it is wonderful?
And Manoe took a kid of the goats and its meat-offering, and offered it on the rock to the Lord; and the angel wrought a distinct work, and Manoe and his wife were looking on.
And it came to pass when the flame went up above the altar toward heaven, that the angel of the Lord went up in the flame; and Manoe and his wife were looking, and they fell upon their face to the earth.
And the angel appeared no more to Manoe and to his wife: then Manoe knew that this was an angel of the Lord.
And Manoe said to his wife, We shall surely die, because we have seen God.
But his wife said to him, If the Lord were pleased to slay us, he would not have received of our hand a whole-burnt-offering and a meat-offering; and he would not have shewn us all these things, neither would he have caused us to hear all these things
And the woman brought forth a son, and she called his name Sampson; and the child grew, and the Lord blessed him.
And the Spirit of the Lord began to go out with him in the camp of Dan, and between Saraa and Esthaol.
Give thanks to the Lord: for he is good: for his mercy endures for ever.
Give thanks to the God of gods; for his mercy endures for ever.
To him who along has wrought great wonders: for his mercy endures for ever.
To him who made the heavens by understanding; for his mercy endures for ever.
To him who established the earth on the waters; for his mercy endures for ever.
To him who alone made great lights; for his mercy endures for ever.
The sun to rule by day; for his mercy endures for ever.
The moon and the stars to rule the night; for his mercy endures for ever.
To him who smote Egypt with their first-born; for his mercy endures for ever.
And brought Israel out of the midst of them; for his mercy endures for ever:
with a strong hand, and a high arm: for his mercy endures for ever.
To him who divided the Red Sea into parts: for his mercy endures for ever:
and brought Israel through the midst of it: for his mercy endures for ever:
and overthrew Pharao and his host in the Red Sea: for his mercy endures for ever.
To him who led his people through the wilderness: for his mercy endures for ever.
To him who smote great kings: for his mercy endures for ever:
and slew mighty kings; for his mercy endures for ever:
Seon king of the Amorites: for his mercy endures for ever:
and Og king of Basan: for his mercy endures for ever:
and gave their land for an inheritance: for his mercy endures for ever:
even an inheritance to Israel his servant: for his mercy endures for ever.
For the Lord remembered us in our low estate; for his mercy endures for ever:
and redeemed us from our enemies; for his mercy endures for ever.
Who gives food to all flesh; for his mercy endures for ever.
Give thanks to the God of heaven; for his mercy endures for ever.
O Lord, I have hoped in thee: let me never be put to shame.
In thy righteousness deliver me and rescue me: incline thine ear to me, and save me.
Be to me a protecting God, and a strong hold to save me: for thou art my fortress and my refuge.
Deliver me, O my God, from the hand of the sinner, from the hand of the transgressor and unjust man.
For thou art my support, O Lord; O Lord, thou art my hope from my youth.
On thee have I been stayed from the womb: from the belly of my mother thou art my protector: of thee is my praise continually.
I am become as it were a wonder to many: but thou art my strong helper.
Let my mouth be filled with praise, that I may hymn thy glory, and thy majesty all the day.
Cast me not off at the time of old age; forsake me not when my strength fails.
For mine enemies have spoken against me; and they that lay wait for my soul have taken counsel together,
saying, God has forsaken him: persecute ye and take him; for there is none to deliver him.
O God, go not far from me, O my God, draw nigh to my help.
Let those that plot against my soul be ashamed and utterly fail: let those that seek my hurt be clothed with shame and dishonour.
But I will hope continually, and will praise thee more and more.
My mouth shall declare thy righteousness openly, and thy salvation all the day; for I am not acquainted with the affairs of men.
I will go on in the might of the Lord: O Lord, I will make mention of thy righteousness only.
O God, thou hast taught me from my youth, and until now will I declare thy wonders;
even until I am old and advanced in years. O God, forsake me not; until I shall have declared thine arm to all the generation that is to come:
even thy power and thy righteousness, O God, up to the highest heavens, even the mighty works which thou has done: O God, who is like to thee?
What afflictions many and sore hast thou shewed me! yet thou didst turn and quicken me, and broughtest me again from the depths of the earth.
Thou didst multiply thy righteousness, and didst turn and comfort me, and broughtest me again out of the depths of the earth.
I will also therefore give thanks to thee, O God, because of thy truth, on an instrument of psalmody: I will sing psalms to thee on the harp, O Holy One of Israel.
My lips shall rejoice when I sing to thee; and my soul, which thou hast redeemed.
Moreover also my tongue shall dwell all the day upon thy righteousness; when they shall be ashamed and confounded that seek my hurt.
The words of the Preacher, the son of David, king of Israel in Jerusalem.
Vanity of vanities, said the Preacher, vanity of vanities; all is vanity.
What advantage is there to a man in all his labour that he takes under the sun?
A generation goes, and a generation comes: but the earth stands for ever.
And the sun arises, and the sun goes down and draws toward its place;
arising there it proceeds southward, and goes round toward the north. The wind goes round and round, and the wind returns to its circuits.
All the rivers run into the sea; and yet the sea is not filled: to the place whence the rivers come, thither they return again.
All things are full of labour; a man will not be able to speak of them: neither shall the eye be satisfied with seeing, neither shall the ear be filled with hearing.
What is that which has been? the very thing which shall be: and what is that which has been done? the very thing which shall be done: and there is no new thing under the sun.
Who is he that shall speak and say, Behold, this is new? it has already been in the ages that have passed before us.
There is no memorial to the first things; neither to the things that have been last shall their memorial be with them that shall at the last time.
I the Preacher was king over Israel in Jerusalem.
And I applied my heart to seek out and examine by wisdom concerning all things that are done under heaven, for God has given to the sons of men an evil trouble to be troubled therewith.
I beheld all the works that were wrought under the sun; and, beheld, all were vanity and waywardness of spirit.
That which is crooked cannot be made straight: and deficiency cannot be numbered.
I spoke in my heart, saying, Behold, I am increased, and have acquired wisdom beyond all who were before me in Jerusalem: also I applied my heart to know wisdom and knowledge.
And my heart knew muchwisdom, and knowledge, parables and understanding: I perceived that this also is waywardness of spirit.
For in the abundance of wisdom is abundance of knowledge; and he that increases knowledge will increase sorrow.
And the woman said to the serpent, We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden,
but of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the garden, God said, Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die.
And the serpent said to the woman, Ye shall not surely die.
For God knew that in whatever day ye should eat of it your eyes would be opened, and ye would be as gods, knowing good and evil.
And the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant to the eyes to look upon and beautiful to contemplate, and having taken of its fruit she ate, and she gave to her husband also with her, and they ate.
And the eyes of both were opened, and they perceived that they were naked, and they sewed fig leaves together, and made themselves aprons to go round them.
And they heard the voice of the Lord God walking in the garden in the afternoon; and both Adam and his wife hid themselves from the face of the Lord God in the midst of the trees of the garden.
And the Lord God called Adam and said to him, Adam, where art thou?
And he said to him, I heard thy voice as thou walkedst in the garden, and I feared because I was naked and I hid myself.
And God said to him, Who told thee that thou wast naked, unless thou hast eaten of the tree concerning which I charged thee of it alone not to eat?
And Adam said, The woman whom thou gavest to be with meshe gave me of the tree and I ate.
And the Lord God said to the woman, Why hast thou done this? And the woman said, The serpent deceived me and I ate.
And the Lord God said to the serpent, Because thou hast done this thou art cursed above all cattle and all the brutes of the earth, on thy breast and belly thou shalt go, and thou shalt eat earth all the days of thy life.
And I will put enmity between thee and the woman and between thy seed and her seed, he shalt watch against thy head, and thou shalt watch against his heel.
And to the woman he said, I will greatly multiply thy pains and thy groanings; in pain thou shalt bring forth children, and thy submission shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee.
And to Adam he said, Because thou hast hearkened to the voice of thy wife, and eaten of the tree concerning which I charged thee of it only not to eatof that thou hast eaten, cursed the ground in thy labours, in pain shalt thou eat of it all the days of thy life.
Thorns and thistles shall it bring forth to thee, and thou shalt eat the herb of the field.
In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat thy bread until thou return to the earth out of which thou wast taken, for earth thou art and to earth thou shalt return.
And Adam called the name of his wife Life, because she was the mother of all living.
And the Lord God made for Adam and his wife garments of skin, and clothed them.
And God said, Behold, Adam is become as one of us, to know good and evil, and now lest at any time he stretch forth his hand, and take of the tree of life and eat, and he shall live forever
So the Lord God sent him forth out of the garden of Delight to cultivate the ground out of which he was taken.
And he cast out Adam and caused him to dwell over against the garden of Delight, and stationed the cherubs and the fiery sword that turns about to keep the way of the tree of life.
Then Tobit called his son Tobias, and said unto him, My son, see that the man have his wages, which went with thee, and thou must give him more.
And Tobias said unto him, O father, it is no harm to me to give him half of those things which I have brought:
For he hath brought me again to thee in safety, and made whole my wife, and brought me the money, and likewise healed thee.
Then the old man said, It is due unto him.
So he called the angel, and he said unto him, Take half of all that ye have brought and go away in safety.
Then he took them both apart, and said unto them, Bless God, praise him, and magnify him, and praise him for the things which he hath done unto you in the sight of all that live. It is good to praise God, and exalt his name, and honourably to shew forth the works of God; therefore be not slack to praise him.
It is good to keep close the secret of a king, but it is honourable to reveal the works of God. Do that which is good, and no evil shall touch you.
Prayer is good with fasting and alms and righteousness. A little with righteousness is better than much with unrighteousness. It is better to give alms than to lay up gold:
For alms doth deliver from death, and shall purge away all sin. Those that exercise alms and righteousness shall be filled with life:
But they that sin are enemies to their own life.
Surely I will keep close nothing from you. For I said, It was good to keep close the secret of a king, but that it was honourable to reveal the works of God.
Now therefore, when thou didst pray, and Sara thy daughter in law, I did bring the remembrance of your prayers before the Holy One: and when thou didst bury the dead, I was with thee likewise.
And when thou didst not delay to rise up, and leave thy dinner, to go and cover the dead, thy good deed was not hid from me: but I was with thee.
And now God hath sent me to heal thee and Sara thy daughter in law.
I am Raphael, one of the seven holy angels, which present the prayers of the saints, and which go in and out before the glory of the Holy One.
Then they were both troubled, and fell upon their faces: for they feared.
But he said unto them, Fear not, for it shall go well with you; praise God therefore.
For not of any favour of mine, but by the will of our God I came; wherefore praise him for ever.
All these days I did appear unto you; but I did neither eat nor drink, but ye did see a vision.
Now therefore give God thanks: for I go up to him that sent me; but write all things which are done in a book.
And when they arose, they saw him no more.
Then they confessed the great and wonderful works of God, and how the angel of the Lord had appeared unto them.
See how the just man has perished, and no one lays it to heart: and righteous men are taken away, and no one considers: for the righteous has been removed out of the way of injustice.
His burial shall be in peace: he has been removed out of the way.
But draw ye near hither, ye lawless children, the seed of adulterers and the harlot.
Wherein have ye been rioting? and against whom have ye opened your mouth, and against whom have ye loosed your tongue? are ye not children of perdition? a lawless seed?
who call upon idols under the leafy trees, slaying your children in the valleys among the rocks?
That is thy portion, this is thy lot: and to them hast thou poured forth drink-offerings, and to these hast thou offered meat-offerings. Shall I not therefore be angry for these things?
On a lofty and high mountain, there is thy bed, and thither thou carriedst up thy meat-offerings:
and behind the posts of thy door thou didst place thy memorials. Didst thou think that if thou shouldest depart from me, thou wouldest gain? thou hast loved those that lay with thee;
and thou hast multiplied thy whoredom with them, and thou hast increased the number of them that are far from thee, and hast sent ambassadors beyond thy borders, and hast been debased even to hell.
Thou has wearied thyself with thy many ways; yet thou saidst not, I will cease to strengthen myself: for thou has done these things; therefore thou has not supplicated me.
Through dread of whom hast thou feared, and lied against me, and has not remembered, nor considered me, nor regarded me, yea, though when I see thee I pass thee by, yet thou has not feared me.
And I will declare thy righteousness, and thy sins, which shall not profit thee.
When thou criest out, let them deliver thee in thine affliction: for all these the wind shall take, and the tempest shall carry them away: but they that cleave to me shall possess the land, and shall inherit my holy mountain.
And they shall say, Clear the ways before him, and take up the stumbling-blocks out of the way of my people.
Thus saith the Most High, who dwells on high for ever, Holy in the holies, is his name, the Most High resting in the holies, and giving patience to the faint-hearted, and giving life to the broken-hearted:
I will not take vengeance on you for ever, neither will I be always angry with you: for my Spirit shall go forth from me, and I have created all breath.
On account of sin for a little while I grieved him, and smote him, and turned away my face from him; and he was grieved, and he went on sorrowful in his ways.
I have seen his ways, and healed him, and comforted him, and given him true comfort;
peace upon peace to them that are far off, and to them that are nigh: and the Lord has said, I will heal them.
But the unrighteous shall be tossed as troubled waves, and shall not be able to rest.
There is no joy to the ungodly, said God.
Then Sophar the Minaean answered and said,
I did not suppose that thou wouldest answer thus: neither do ye understand more than I.
I will hear my shameful reproach; and the spirit of my understanding answers me.
Hast thou not known these things of old, from the time that man was set upon the earth?
But the mirth of the ungodly is a signal downfall, and the joy of transgressors is destruction:
although his gifts should go up to heaven, and his sacrifice reach the clouds.
For when he shall seem to be now established, then he shall utterly perish: and they that knew him shall say, Where is he?
Like a dream that has fled away, he shall not be found; and he has fled like a vision of the night.
Let his inferiors destroy his children, and let his hands kindle the fire of sorrow.
yet he shall not at all be able to help himself; the gall of an asp is in his belly.
His wealth unjustly collected shall be vomited up; a messenger of wrath shall drag him out of his house.
And let him suck the poison of serpents, and let the serpent's tongue slay him.
Let him not see the milk of the pastures, nor the supplies of honey and butter.
He has laboured unprofitably and in vain, for wealth of which he shall not taste: it is as a lean thing, unfit for food, which he cannot swallow.
For he has broken down the houses of many mighty men: and he has plundered an habitation, though he built it not.
There is no security to his possessions; he shall not be saved by his desire.
There is nothing remaining of his provisions; therefore his goods shall not flourish.
But when he shall seem to be just satisfied, he shall be straitened; and all distress shall come upon him.
If by any means he would fill his belly, let God send upon him the fury of wrath; let him bring a torrent of pains upon him.
And he shall by no means escape from the power of the sword; let the brazen bow wound him.
And let the arrow pierce through his body; and let the stars be against his dwelling-place: let terrors come upon him.
And let all darkness wait for him: a fire that burns not out shall consume him; and let a stranger plague his house.
And let the heaven reveal his iniquities, and the earth rise up against him.
Let destruction bring his house to an end; let a day of wrath come upon him.
This is the portion of an ungodly man from the Lord, and the possession of his goods appointed him by the all-seeing God.
And David departed thence, and escaped; and he comes to the cave of Odollam, and his brethren hear, and the house of his father, and they go down to him there.
And there gathered to him every one that was in distress, and every one that was in debt, and every one that was troubled in mind; and he was a leader over them, and there were with him about four hundred men.
And David departed thence to Massephath of Moab, and said to the king of Moab, Let, I pray thee, my father and my mother be with thee, until I know what God will do to me.
And he persuaded the King of Moab, and they dwell with him continually, while David was in the hold.
And Gad the prophet said to David, Dwell not in the hold: go, and thou shalt enter the land of Juda. So David went, and came and dwelt in the city of Saric.
And Saul heard that David was discovered, and his men with him: now Saul dwelt in the hill below the field that is in Rama, and his spear was in his hand, and all his servants stood near him.
And Saul said to his servants that stood by him, Hear now, ye sons of Benjamin, will the son of Jessae indeed give all of you fields and vineyards, and will he make you all captains of hundreds and captains of thousands?
That ye are conspiring against me, and there is no one that informs me, whereas my son has made a covenant with the son of Jessae, and there is no one of you that is sorry for me, or informs me, that my son has stirred up my servant against me for an enemy, as it is this day?
And Doec the Syrian who was over the mules of Saul answered and said, I saw the son of Jessae as he came to Nomba to Abimelech son of Achitob the priest.
And the priest enquired of God for him, and gave him provision, and gave him the sword of Goliath the Philistine.
And the king sent to call Abimelech son of Achitob and all his father's sons, the priests that were in Nomba; and they all came to the king.
And Saul said, Hear now, thou son of Achitob. And he said, Lo! I am here, speak, my lord.
And Saul said to him, Why have thou and the son of Jessae conspired against me, that thou shouldest give him bread and a sword, and shouldest enquire of God for him, to raise him up against me as an enemy, as he is this day?
And he answered the king, and said, And who is there among all thy servants faithful as David, and he is a son-in-law of the king, and he is executor of all thy commands, and is honourable in thy house?
Have I begun to-day to enquire of God for him? By no means: let not the king bring a charge against his servant, and against thee whole of my father's house; for thy servant knew not in all these matters anything great or small.
And king Saul said, Thou shalt surely die, Abimelech, thou, and all thy father's house.
And the king said to the footmen that attended on him, Draw nigh and slay the priests of the Lord, because their hand is with David, and because they knew that he fled, and they did not inform me. But the servants of the king would not lift their hands to fall upon the priest of the Lord.
And the king said to Doec, Turn thou, and fall upon the priests: and Doec the Syrian turned, and slew the priests of the Lord in that day, three hundred and five men, all wearing an ephod.
And he smote Nomba the city of the priest with the edge of the sword, both man, and woman, infant and suckling, and calf, and ox, and sheep.
And one son of Abimelech son of Achitob escapes, and his name was Abiathar, and he fled after David.
And Abiathar told David that Saul had slain all the priests of the Lord.
And David said to Abiathar, I knew it in that day, that Doec the Syrian would surely tell Saul: I am guilty of the death of the house of thy father.
Dwell with me; fear not, for wherever I shall seek a place of safety for my life, I will also seek a place for thy life, for thou art safely guarded while with me.
These are the names of the sons of Israel that came into Egypt together with Jacob their father; they came in each with their whole family.
Ruben, Simeon, Levi, Judas,
Issachar, Zabulon, Benjamin,
Dan and Nephthalim, Gad and Aser.
But Joseph was in Egypt. And all the souls born of Jacob were seventy-five.
And Joseph died, and all his brethren, and all that generation.
And the children of Israel increased and multiplied, and became numerous and grew exceedingly strong, and the land multiplied them.
And there arose up another king over Egypt, who knew not Joseph.
And he said to his nation, Behold, the race of the children of Israel is a great multitude, and is stronger than we:
come then, let us deal craftily with them, lest at any time they be increased, and whensoever war shall happen to us, these also shall be added to our enemies, and having prevailed against us in war, they will depart out of the land.
And he set over them task-masters, who should afflict them in their works; and they built strong cities for Pharao, both Pitho, and Ramesses, and On, which is Heliopolis.
But as they humbled them, by so much they multiplied, and grew exceedingly strong; and the Egyptians greatly abhorred the children of Israel.
And they embittered their life by hard labours, in the clay and in brick-making, and all the works in the plains, according to all the works, wherein they caused them to serve with violence.
And the king of the Egyptians spoke to the midwives of the Hebrews; the name of the one was, Sepphora; and the name of the second, Phua.
And he said, When ye do the office of midwives to the Hebrew women, and they are about to be delivered, if it be a male, kill it; but if a female, save it.
But the midwives feared God, and did not as the king of Egypt appointed them; and they saved the male children alive.
And the king of Egypt called the midwives, and said to them, Why is it that ye have done this thing, and saved the male children alive?
And the midwives said to Pharao, The Hebrew women are not as the women of Egypt, for they are delivered before the midwives go in to them. So they bore children.
And God did well to the midwives, and the people multiplied, and grew very strong.
And as the midwives feared God, they established for themselves families.
And Pharao charged all his people, saying, Whatever male child shall be born to the Hebrews, cast into the river; and every female, save it alive.
To thee, O Lord, have I cried; my God, be not silent toward me: lest thou be silent toward me, and so I should be likened to them that go down to the pit.
Hearken to the voice of my supplication, when I pray to thee, when I lift up my hands toward thy holy temple.
Draw not away my soul with sinners, and destroy me not with the workers of iniquity, who speak peace with their neighbours, but evils are in their hearts.
Give them according to their works, and according to the wickedness of their devices: give them according to the works of their hands; render their recompense unto them.
Because they have not attended to the works of the Lord, even to the works of his hands, thou shalt pull them down, and shalt not build them up.
Blessed be the Lord, for he has hearkened to the voice of my petition.
The Lord is my helper and my defender; my heart has hoped in him, and I am helped: my flesh has revived, and willingly will I give praise to him.
The Lord is the strength of his people, and the saving defender of his anointed.
Save thy people, and bless thine inheritance: and take care of them, and lift them up for ever.
And at the last days the mountain of the Lord shall be manifest, established on the tops of the mountains, and it shall be exalted above the hills; and the peoples shall hasten to it.
And many nations shall go, and say, Come, let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob; and they shall shew us his way, and we will walk in his paths: for out of Sion shall go forth a law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.
And he shall judge among many peoples, and shall rebuke strong nations afar off; and they shall beat their swords into ploughshares, and their spears into sickles; and nation shall no more lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn to war any more.
And every one shall rest under his vine, and every one under his fig-tree; and there shall be none to alarm them: for the mouth of the Lord Almighty has spoken these words.
For all other nations shall walk everyone in his own way, but we will walk in the name of the Lord our God for ever and ever.
In that day, saith the Lord, I will gather her that is bruised, and will receive her that is cast out, and those whom I rejected.
And I will make her that was bruised a remnant, and her that was rejected a mighty nation: and the Lord shall reign over them in mount Sion from henceforth, even for ever.
Hold a feast to me, ye islands: for the princes shall renew their strength: let them draw nigh and speak together: then let them declare judgment.
Who raised up righteousness from the east, and called it to his feet, so that it should go? shall appoint it an adversary of Gentiles, and shall dismay kings, and bury their swords in the earth, and cast forth their bows and arrows as sticks?
And he shall pursue them; the way of his feet shall proceed in peace.
Who has wrought and done these things? he has called it who called it from the generations of old; I God, the first and to all futurity, I AM.
The nations saw, and feared; the ends of the earth drew nigh, and came together,
every one judging for his neighbor and that to assist his brother: and one will say,
The artificer has become strong, and the coppersmith that smites with the hammer, and forges also: sometimes he will say, It is a piece well joined: they have fastened them with nails; they will fix them, and they shall not be moved.
But thou, Israel, art my servant Jacob, and he whom I have chosen, the seed of Abraam, whom I have loved:
whom I have taken hold of from the ends of the earth, and from the high places of it I have called thee, and said to thee, Thou art my servant; I have chosen thee, and I have not forsaken thee.
Fear not; for I am with thee: wander not; for I am thy God, who have strengthened thee; and I have helped thee, and have established thee with my just right hand.
Behold, all thine adversaries shall be ashamed and confounded; for they shall be as if they were not: and all thine opponents shall perish.
Thou shalt seek them, and thou shalt not find the men who shall insolently rage against thee: for they shall be as if they were not, and they that war against thee shall not be.
For I am thy God, who holdeth thy right hand, who saith to thee,
Fear not, Jacob, and thou Israel few in number; I have helped thee, saith thy God, he that redeems thee, O Israel.
Behold, I have made thee as new saw-shaped threshing wheels of a waggon; and thou shalt thresh the mountains, and beat the hills to powder, and make them as chaff:
and thou shalt winnow them, and the wind shall carry them away, and a tempest shall scatter them: but thou shalt rejoice in the holy ones of Israel.
And the poor and the needy shall exult; for when they shall seek water, and there shall be none, and their tongue is parched with thirst, I the Lord God, I the God of Israel will hear, and will not forsake them:
but I will open rivers on the mountains, and fountains in the midst of plains: I will make the desert pools of water, and a thirsty land watercourses.
I will plant in the dry land the cedar and box, the myrtle and cypress, and white poplar:
that they may see, and know, and perceive, and understand together, that the hand of the Lord has wrought these works, and the Holy One of Israel has displayed them.
Your judgment draws nigh, saith the Lord God; your counsels have drawn nigh, saith the King of Jacob.
Let them draw nigh, and declare to you what things shall come to pass; or tell us what things were of old, and we will apply our understanding, and we shall know what are the last and the future things:
tell us, declare ye to us the things that are coming on at the last time, and we shall know that ye are gods: do good, and do evil, and we shall wonder, and see at the same time
whence ye are, and whence is your works: they have chosen you an abomination out of the earth.
But I have raised up him that comes from the north, and him that comes from the rising of the sun: they shall be called by my name: let the princes come, and as potter's clay, and as a potter treading clay, so shall ye be trodden down.
For who will declare the things from the beginning, that we may know also the former things, and we will say that they are true? there is no one that speaks beforehand, nor anyone that hears your words.
I will give dominion to Sion, and will comfort Jerusalem by the way.
For from among the nations, behold, there was no one; and of their idols there was none to declare anything: and if I should ask them, Whence are ye? they could not answer me.
For these are your makers, as ye think, and they that cause you to err in vain.
Give of thy bread to the hungry, and of thy garments to them that are naked; and according to thine abundance give alms: and let not thine eye be envious, when thou givest alms.
Pour out thy bread on the burial of the just, but give nothing to the wicked.
Ask counsel of all that are wise, and despise not any counsel that is profitable.
Bless the Lord thy God alway, and desire of him that thy ways may be directed, and that all thy paths and counsels may prosper: for every nation hath not counsel; but the Lord himself giveth all good things, and he humbleth whom he will, as he will; now therefore, my son, remember my commandments, neither let them be put out of thy mind.
And now I signify this to they that I committed ten talents to Gabael the son of Gabrias at Rages in Media.
And fear not, my son, that we are made poor: for thou hast much wealth, if thou fear God, and depart from all sin, and do that which is pleasing in his sight.
Blessed are they whose transgressions are forgiven, and who sins are covered.
Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin, and whose mouth there is no guile.
Because I kept silence, my bones waxed old, from my crying all the day.
For day and night thy hand was heavy upon me: I became thoroughly miserable while a thorn was fastened in me. Pause.
I acknowledged my sin, and hid not mine iniquity: I said, I will confess mine iniquity to the Lord against myself; and thou forgavest the ungodliness of my heart. Pause.
Therefore shall every holy one pray to thee in a fit time: only in the deluge of many waters they shall not come nigh to him.
Thou art my refuge from the affliction that encompasses me; my joy, to deliver me from them that have compassed me. Pause.
I will instruct thee and guide thee in this way wherein thou shalt go: I will fix mine eyes upon thee.
Be ye not as horse and mule, which have no understanding; but thou must constrain their jaws with bit and curb, lest they should come nigh to thee.
Many are the scourges of the sinner: but him that hopes in the Lord mercy shall compass about.
Be glad in the Lord, and exult, ye righteous: and glory, all ye that are upright in heart.
And all the congregation of the children of Israel departed from the wilderness of Sin, according to their encampments, by the word of the Lord; and they encamped in Raphidin: and there was no water for the people to drink.
And the people reviled Moses, saying, Give us water, that we may drink; and Moses said to them, Why do ye revile me, and why tempt ye the Lord?
And the people thirsted there for water, and there the people murmured against Moses, saying, Why is this? hast thou brought us up out of Egypt to slay us and our children and our cattle with thirst?
And Moses cried to the Lord, saying, What shall I do to this people? yet a little while and they will stone me.
And the Lord said to Moses, Go before this people, and take to thyself of the elders of the people; and the rod with which thou smotest the river, take in thine hand, and thou shalt go.
Behold, I stand there before thou come, on the rock in Choreb, and thou shalt smite the rock, and water shall come out from it, and the people shall drink. And Moses did so before the sons of Israel.
And he called the name of that place, Temptation, and Reviling, because of the reviling of the children of Israel, and because they tempted the Lord, saying, Is the Lord among us or not?
And Amalec came and fought with Israel in Raphidin.
And Moses said to Joshua, Choose out for thyself mighty men, and go forth and set the army in array against Amalec to-morrow; and, behold, I shall stand on the top of the hill, and the rod of God will be in my hand.
And Joshua did as Moses said to him, and he went out and set the army in array against Amalec, and Moses and Aaron and Or went up to the top of the hill.
And it came to pass, when Moses lifted up his hands, Israel prevailed; and when he let down his hands, Amalec prevailed.
But the hands of Moses were heavy, and they took a stone and put it under him, and he sat upon it; and Aaron and Or supported his hands one on this side and the other on that, and the hands of Moses were supported till the going down of the sun.
And Joshua routed Amalec and all his people with the slaughter of the sword.
And the Lord said to Moses, Write this for a memorial in a book, and speak this in the ears of Joshua; for I will utterly blot out the memorial of Amalec from under heaven.
And Moses built an altar to the Lord, and called the name of it, The Lord my Refuge.
For with a secret hand the Lord wages war upon Amalec to all generations.
And Elius further continued, and said,
Wait for me yet a little while, that I may teach thee: for there is yet speech in me.
Having fetched my knowledge from afar, and according to my works,
I will speak just things truly, and thou shalt not unjustly receive unjust words.
But know that the Lord will not cast off an innocent man: being mighty in strength of wisdom,
But he will hearken to the righteous: and he has said that they shall turn from unrighteousness.
But he preserves not the ungodly; because they are not willing to know the Lord, and because when reproved they were disobedient.
Therefore let their soul die in youth, and their life be wounded by messengers of death.
Because they afflicted the weak and helpless: and he will vindicate the judgment of the meek.
there is a deep gulf and a rushing stream beneath it, and thy table came down full of fatness. Judgment shall not fail from the righteous;
but there shall be wrath upon the ungodly, by reason of the ungodliness of the bribes which they received for iniquities.
Let not thy mind willingly turn thee aside from the petition of the feeble that are in distress.
But take heed lest thou do that which is wrong: for of this thou has made choice because of poverty.
Behold, the Mighty One shall prevail by his strength: for who is powerful as he is?
And who is he that examines his works? or who can say, he has wrought injustice?
Remember that his works are great beyond those which men have attempted.
Every man has seen in himself, how many mortals are wounded.
And the drops of rain are numbered by him, and shall be poured out in rain to form a cloud.
The ancient heavens shall flow, and the clouds overshadow innumerable mortals: he has fixed a time to cattle, and they know the order of rest. Yet by all these things thy understanding is not astonished, neither is thy mind disturbed in thy body.
And it came to pass after Saul was dead, that David returned from smiting Amalec, and David abode two days in Sekelac.
And it came to pass on the third day, that, behold, a man came from the camp, from the people of Saul, and his garments were rent, and earth was upon his head: and it came to pass when he went in to David, that he fell upon the earth, and did obeisance to him.
And David said to him, Whence comest thou? and he said to him, I have escaped out of the camp of Israel.
And David said to him, What is the matter? tell me. And he said, The people fled out of the battle, and many of the people have fallen and are dead, and Saul and Jonathan his son are dead.
And David said to the young man who brought him the tidings, How knowest thou that Saul and Jonathan his son are dead?
And the young man that brought the tidings, said to him, I happened accidentally to be upon mount Gelbue; and, behold, Saul was leaning upon his spear, and, behold, the chariots and captains of horse pressed hard upon him.
And he looked behind him, and saw me, and called me; and I said, Behold, here am I.
And he said to me, Who art thou? and I said, I am an Amalekite.
And he said to me, Stand, I pray thee, over me, and slay me, for a dreadful darkness has come upon me, for all my life is in me.
So I stood over him and slew him, because I knew he would not live after he was fallen; and I took the crown that was upon his head, and the bracelet that was upon his arm, and I have brought them hither to my lord.
And David laid hold of his garments, and rent them; and all the men who were with him rent their garments.
And they lamented, and wept, and fasted till evening, for Saul and for Jonathan his son, and for the people of Juda, and for the house of Israel, because they were smitten with the sword.
And David said to the young man who brought the tidings to him, Whence art thou? and he said, I am the son of an Amalekite sojourner.
And David said to him, How was it thou wast not afraid to lift thy hand to destroy the anointed of the Lord?
And David called one of his young men, and said, Go and fall upon him: and he smote him, and he died.
And David said to him, Thy blood be upon thine own head; for thy mouth has testified against thee, saying, I have slain the anointed of the Lord.
And David lamented with this lamentation over Saul and over Jonathan his son.
And he gave orders to teach it the sons of Juda: behold, it is written in the book of Right.
Set up a pillar, O Israel, for the slain that died upon thy high places: how are the mighty fallen!
Tell it not in Geth, and tell it not as glad tidings in the streets of Ascalon, lest the daughters of the Philistines rejoice, lest the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph.
Ye mountains of Gelbue, let not dew no rain descend upon you, nor fields of first-fruits be upon you, for there the shield of the mighty ones has been grievously assailed; the shield of Saul was not anointed with oil.
From the blood of the slain, and from the fat of the mighty, the bow of Jonathan returned not empty; and the sword of Saul turned not back empty.
Saul and Jonathan, the beloved and the beautiful, were not divided: comely were they in their life, and in their death they were not divided: they were swifter than eagles, and they were stronger than lions.
Daughters of Israel, weep for Saul, who clothed you with scarlet together with your adorning, who added golden ornaments to your apparel.
How are the mighty fallen in the midst of the battle! O Jonathan, even the slain ones upon thy high places!
I am grieved for thee, my brother Jonathan; thou wast very lovely to me; thy love to me was wonderful beyond the love of women.
How are the mighty fallen, and the weapons of war perished!
Then Joshua called together the sons of Ruben, and the sons of Gad, and the half tribe of Manasse,
and said to them, Ye have heard all that Moses the servant of the Lord commanded you, and ye have hearkened to my voice in all that he commanded you.
Ye have not deserted your brethren these many days: until this day ye have kept the commandment of the Lord your God.
And now the Lord our God has given our brethren rest, as he told them: now then return and depart to your homes, and to the land of your possession, which Moses gave you on the other side Jordan.
But take great heed to do the commands and the law, which Moses the servant of the Lord commanded you to do; to love the Lord our God, to walk in all his ways, to keep his commands, and to cleave to him, and serve him with all your mind, and with all your soul.
And Joshua blessed them, and dismissed them; and they went to their homes.
And to one half the tribe of Manasse Moses gave a portion in the land of Basan, and to the other half Joshua gave a portion with his brethren on the other side of Jordan westward: and when Joshua sent them away to their homes, then he blessed them.
And they departed with much wealth to their houses, and they divided the spoil of their enemies with their brethren; very much cattle, and silver, and gold, and iron, and much raiment.
So the sons of Ruben, and the sons of Gad, and the half tribe of Manasse, departed from the children of Israel in Selo in the land of Chanaan, to go away into Galaad, into the land of their possession, which they inherited by the command of the Lord, by the hand of Moses.
And they came to Galaad of Jordan, which is in the land of Chanaan: and the children of Ruben, and the children of Gad, and the half tribe of Manasse built there an altar by Jordan, a great altar to look at.
And the children of Israel heard say, Behold, the sons of Ruben, and the sons of Gad, and the half tribe of Manasse have built an altar at the borders of the land of Chanaan at Galaad of Jordan, on the opposite side to the children of Israel.
And all the children of Israel gathered together to Selo, so as to go up and fight against them.
And the children of Israel sent to the sons of Ruben, and the sons of Gad, and to the sons of the half tribe of Manasse into the land of Galaad, both Phinees the son of Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest,
and ten of the chiefs with him; there was one chief of every household out of all the tribes of Israel; (the heads of families are the captains of thousands in Israel.)
Lo! did not Achar the son of Zara commit a trespass taking of the accursed thing, and there was wrath on the whole congregation of Israel? and he himself died alone in his own sin.
And the sons of Ruben, and the sons of Gad, and the half tribe of Manasse answered, and spoke to the captains of the thousands of Israel, saying,
God even God is the Lord, and God even God himself knows, and Israel he shall know; if we have transgressed before the Lord by apostasy, let him not deliver us this day.
And if we have built to ourselves an altar, so as to apostatize from the Lord our God, so as to offer upon it a sacrifice of whole-burnt-offerings, so as to offer upon it a sacrifice of peace-offering, the Lord shall require it.
But we have done this for the sake of precaution concerning this thing, saying, Lest hereafter your sons should say to our sons, What have ye to do with the Lord God of Israel?
Whereas the Lord has set boundaries between us and you, even Jordan, and ye have no portion in the Lord: so your sons shall alienate our sons, that they should not worship the Lord.
And we gave orders to do thus, to build this altar, not for burnt-offerings, nor for meat-offerings;
but that this may be a witness between you and us, and between our posterity after us, that we may do service to the Lord before him, with our burnt-offerings and our meat-offerings and our peace-offerings: so your sons shall not say to our sons, hereafter, Ye have no portion in the Lord.
And we said, If ever it should come to pass that they should speak so to us, or to our posterity hereafter; then shall they say, Behold the likeness of the altar of the Lord, which our fathers made, not for the sake of burnt-offerings, nor for the sake of meat-offerings, but it is a witness between you and us, and between our sons.
Far be it from us therefore that we should turn away from the Lord this day so as to apostatize from the Lord, so as that we should build an altar for burnt-offerings, and for peace-offerings, besides the altar of the Lord which is before his tabernacle.
And Phinees the priest and all the chiefs of the congregation of Israel who were with him heard the words which the children of Ruben, and the children of Gad, and the half tribe of Manasse spoke; and it pleased them.
And Phinees the priest said to the sons of Ruben, and to the sons of Gad, and to the half of the tribe of Manasse, To-day we know that the Lord is with us, because ye have not trespassed grievously against the Lord, and because ye have delivered the children of Israel out of the hand of the Lord.
So Phinees the priest and the princes departed from the children of Ruben, and from the children of Gad, and from the half tribe of Manasse out of Galaad into the land of Chanaan to the children of Israel; and reported the words to them.
And it pleased the children of Israel; and they spoke to the children of Israel, and blessed the God of the children of Israel, and told them to go up no more to war against the others to destroy the land of the children of Ruben, and the children of Gad, and the half tribe of Manasse: so they dwelt upon it.
And Joshua gave a name to the altar of the children of Ruben, and the children of Gad, and the half tribe of Manasse; and said, It is a testimony in the midst of them, that the Lord is their God.
And Debbora and Barac son of Abineem sang in that day, saying,
A revelation was made in Israel when the people were made willing: Praise ye the Lord.
Hear, ye kings, and hearken, rulers: I will sing, it is I who will sing to the Lord, it is I, I will sing a psalm to the Lord the god of Israel.
O Lord, in thy going forth on Seir, when thou wentest forth out of the land of Edom, the earth quaked and the heaven dropped dews, and the clouds dropped water.
The mountains were shaken before the face of the Lord Eloi, this Sina before the face of the Lord God of Israel.
In the days of Samegar son of Anath, in the days of Jael, they deserted the ways, and went in by-ways; they went in crooked paths.
The mighty men in Israel failed, they failed until Debbora arose, until she arose a mother in Israel.
They chose new gods; then the cities of rulers fought; there was not a shield or spear seen among forty thousand in Israel.
My heart inclines to the orders given in Israel; ye that are willing among the people, bless the Lord.
Ye that mount a she-ass at noon-day, ye that sit on the judgment-seat, and walk by the roads of them that sit in judgment by the way; declare
ye that are delivered from the noise of disturbers among the drawers of water; there shall they relate righteous acts: O Lord, increase righteous acts in Israel: then the people of the Lord went down to the cities.
Awake, awake, Debbora; awake, awake, utter a song: arise, Barac, and lead thy captivity captive, son of Abineem.
Then went down the remnant to the strong, the people of the Lord went down for him among the mighty ones from me.
Ephraim rooted them out in Amalec, behind thee was Benjamin among thy people: the inhabitants of Machir came down with me searching out the enemy, and from Zabulon came they that draw with the scribe's pen of record.
And princess in Issachar were with Debbora and Barac, thus she sent Barac on his feet in the valleys into the portions of Ruben; great pangs reached to the heart.
Why did they sit between the sheep-folds to hear the bleating of flocks for the divisions of Ruben? there were great searchings of heart.
Galaad is on the other side of Jordan where he pitched his tents; and why does Dan remain in ships? Aser sat down on the sea-coasts, and he will tabernacle at his ports.
The people Zabulon exposed their soul to death, and Nephthali came to the high places of their land.
Kings set themselves in array, then the kings of Chanaan fought in Thanaach at the water of Mageddo; they took no gift of money.
The stars from heaven set themselves in array, they set themselves to fight with Sisara out of their paths.
The brook of Kison swept them away, the ancient brook, the brook Kison: my mighty soul will trample him down.
When the hoofs of the horse were entangled, his mighty ones earnestly hasted
to curse Meroz: Curse ye it, said the angel of the Lord; cursed is every one that dwells in it, because they came not to the help of the Lord, to his help among the mighty.
Blessed among women be Jael wife of Chaber the Kenite; let her be blessed above women in tents.
He asked for water, she gave him milk in a dish; she brought butter of princes.
She stretched forth her left hand to the nail, and her right to the hand workman's hammer, and she smote Sisara with it, she nailed through his head and smote him; she nailed through his temples.
He rolled down between her feet; he fell and lay between her feet; he bowed and fell: where he bowed, there he fell dead.
The mother of Sisara looked down through the window out of the loophole, saying, Why was his chariot ashamed? why did the wheels of his chariots tarry?
Her wise ladies answered her, and she returned answers to herself, saying,
Will they not find him dividing the spoil? he will surely be gracious to every man: there are spoils of dyed garments for Sisara, spoils of various dyed garments, dyed embroidered garments, they are the spoils for his neck.
Thus let all thine enemies perish, O Lord: and they that love him shall be as the going forth of the sun in his strength.
And the Lord said to me, Go yet, and love a woman that loves evil things, an adulteress, even as the Lord loves the children of Israel, and they have respect to strange gods, and love cakes of dried grapes.
So I hired her to myself for fifteen pieces of silver, and a homer of barley, and a flagon of wine.
And I said unto her, Thou shalt wait for me many days; and thou shalt not commit fornication, neither shalt thou be for another man; and I will be for thee.
For the children of Israel shall abide many days without a king, and without a prince, and without a sacrifice, and without an altar, and without a priesthood, and without manifestations.
And afterward shall the children of Israel return, and shall seek the Lord their God, and David their king; and shall be amazed at the Lord and at his goodness in the latter days.
And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the children of Israel, and thou shalt say to them, I am the Lord your God.
Ye shall not do according to the devices of Egypt, in which ye dwelt: and according to the devices of the land of Chanaan, into which I bring you, ye shall not do; and ye shall not walk in their ordinances.
Ye shall observe my judgments, and shall keep my ordinances, and shall walk in them: I am the Lord your God.
So ye shall keep all my ordinances, and all my judgments, and do them; which if a man do, he shall live in them: I am the Lord your God.
No man shall draw nigh to any of his near kindred to uncover their nakedness; I am the Lord.
Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy father, or the nakedness of thy mother, for she is thy mother; thou shalt not uncover her nakedness.
Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy father's wife; it is thy father's nakedness.
The nakedness of thy sister by thy father or by thy mother, born at home or abroad, their nakedness thou shalt not uncover.
The nakedness of thy son's daughter, or thy daughter's daughter, their nakedness thou shalt not uncover; because it is thy nakedness.
Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of the daughter of thy father's wife; she is thy sister by the same father: thou shalt not uncover her nakedness.
Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy father's sister, for she is near akin to thy father.
Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy mother's sister, for she is near akin to thy mother.
Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy father's brother, and thou shalt not go in to his wife; for she is thy relation.
Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy daughter-in-law, for she is thy son's wife, thou shalt not uncover her nakedness.
Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy brother's wife: it is thy brother's nakedness.
The nakedness of a woman and her daughter shalt thou not uncover; her son's daughter, and her daughter's daughter, shalt thou not take, to uncover their nakedness, for they are thy kinswomen: it is impiety.
Thou shalt not take a wife in addition to her sister, as a rival, to uncover her nakedness in opposition to her, while she is yet living.
And thou shalt not go in to a woman under separation for her uncleanness, to uncover her nakedness.
And thou shalt not lie with thy neighbour's wife, to defile thyself with her.
And thou shalt not give of thy seed to serve a ruler; and thou shalt not profane my holy name; I am the Lord.
And thou shalt not lie with a man as with a woman, for it is an abomination.
Neither shalt thou lie with any quadruped for copulation, to be polluted with it: neither shall a woman present herself before any quadruped to have connexion with it; for it is an abomination.
Do not defile yourselves with any of these things; for in all these things the nations are defiled, which I drive out before you,
and the land is polluted; and I have recompensed their iniquity to them because of it, and the land is aggrieved with them that dwell upon it.
And ye shall keep all my statutes and all my ordinances, and ye shall do none of these abominations; neither the native, nor the stranger that joins himself with you:
(for all these abominations the men of the land did who were before you, and the land was defiled,)
and lest the land be aggrieved with you in your polluting it, as it was aggrieved with the nations before you.
For whosoever shall do any of these abominations, the souls that do them shall be destroyed from among their people.
And ye shall keep mine ordinances, that ye may not do any of the abominable practices, which have taken place before your time: and ye shall not be polluted in them; for I am the Lord your God.
And Joseph said to them, This is it that I spoke to you, saying, ye are spies;
herein shall ye be manifested; by the health of Pharao, ye shall not depart hence, unless your younger brother come hither.
Send one of you, and take your brother; and go ye to prison, till your words be clear, whether ye speak the truth or not; but, if not, by the health of Pharao, verily ye are spies.
And bring your younger brother to me, and your words shall be believed; but, if not, ye shall die. And they did so.
And each said to his brother, Yes, indeed, for we are in fault concerning our brother, when we disregarded the anguish of his soul, when he besought us, and we hearkened not to him; and therefore has this affliction come upon us.
And Ruben answered them, saying, Did I not speak to you, saying, Hurt not the boy, and ye heard me not? and, behold, his blood is required.
And their father Jacob said to them, Ye have bereaved me. Joseph is not, Symeon is not, and will ye take Benjamin? all these things have come upon me.
And Ruben spoke to his father, saying, Slay my two sons, if I bring him not to thee; give him into my hand, and I will bring him back to thee.
But he said, My son shall not go down with you, because his brother is dead, and he only has been left; and it shall come to pass that he is afflicted by the way by which ye go, then ye shall bring down my old age with sorrow to Hades.
If it had not been that the Lord was among us, let Israel now say;
if it had not been that the Lord was among us, when men rose up against us;
verily they would have swallowed us up alive, when their wrath was kindled against us:
verily the water would have drowned us, our soul would have gone under the torrent.
Yea, our soul would have gone under the overwhelming water.
Blessed be the Lord, who has not given us for a prey to their teeth.
Our soul has been delivered as a sparrow from the snare of the fowlers: the snare is broken, and we are delivered.
Our help is in the name of the Lord, who made heaven and earth.
Lord, thou hast been our refuge in all generations.
Before the mountains existed, and before the earth and the world were formed, even from age to age, Thou art.
Turn not man back to his low place, whereas thou saidst, Return, ye sons of men?
For a thousand years in thy sight are as the yesterday which is past, and as a watch in the night.
Years shall be vanity to them: let the morning pass away as grass.
In the morning let it flower, and pass away: in the evening let it droop, let it be withered and dried up.
For we have perished in thine anger, and in thy wrath we have been troubled.
Thou hast set our transgressions before thee: our age is in the light of thy countenance.
For all our days are gone, and we have passed away in thy wrath: our years have spun out their tale as a spider.
As for the days of our years, in them are seventy years; and if men should be in strength, eighty years: and the greater part of them would be labour and trouble; for weakness overtakes us, and we shall be chastened.
Who knows the power of thy wrath?
and who knows how to number his days because of the fear of thy wrath? So manifest thy right hand, and those that are instructed in wisdom in the heart.
Return, O Lord, how long? and be intreated concerning thy servants.
We have been satisfied in the morning with thy mercy; and we did exult and rejoice:
let us rejoice in all our days, in return for the days wherein thou didst afflict us, the years wherein we saw evil.
And look upon thy servants, and upon thy works; and guide their children.
And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us: and do thou direct for us the works of our hands.
I will send as it were reptiles on the land: is not the mount of the daughter of Sion a desolate rock?
For thou shalt be as a young bird taken away from a bird that has flown: even thou shalt be so, daughter of Moab: and then do thou, O Arnon,
take farther counsel, and continually make thou a shelter from grief: they flee in darkness at mid-day; they are amazed; be not thou led captive.
The fugitives of Moab shall sojourn with thee; they shall be to you a shelter from the face of the pursuer: for thine alliance has been taken away, and the oppressing ruler has perished from off the earth.
And a throne shall be established with mercy; and one shall sit upon it with truth in the tabernacle of David, judging, and earnestly seeking judgments, and hasting righteousness.
We have heard of the pride of Moab; he is very proud. I have cut off his pride: thy prophecy shall not be thus, no not thus.
Moab shall howl; for all shall howl in the land of Moab: but thou shalt care for them that dwell in Seth, and thou shalt not be ashamed.
The plains of Esebon shall mourn, the vine of Sebama: swallowing up the nations, trample ye her vines, even to Jazer: ye shall not come together; wander ye in the desert: they that were sent are deserted, for they have gone over to the sea.
Therefore will I weep as with the weeping of Jazer for the vine of Sebama; Esebon and Eleale have cast down thy trees; for I will trample on thy harvest and on thy vintages, and all thy plants shall fall.
And gladness and rejoicing shall be taken away from the vineyards; and they shall not at all tread wine into the vats; for the vintage has ceased.
Therefore my belly shall sound as a harp for Moab, and thou hast repaired my inward parts as a wall.
And it shall be to thy shame, (for Moab is wearied at the altars,) that he shall go in to the idols thereof to pray, but they shall not be at all able to deliver him.
This is the word which the Lord spoke against Moab, when he spoke.
And now I say, in three years, of the years of an hireling, the glory of Moab shall be dishonoured with all his great wealth; and he shall be left few in number, and not honoured.
And Nabuchodonosor heard them singing praises; and he wondered, and rose up in haste, and said to his nobles, Did we not cast three men bound into the midst of the fire? and they said to the king, Yes, O king.
And the king said, But I see four men loose, and walking in the midst of the fire, and there has no harm happened to them; and the appearance of the fourth is like the Son of God.
Then Nabuchodonosor drew near to the door of the burning fiery furnace, and said, Sedrach, Misach, and Abdenago, ye servants of the most high God, proceed forth, and come hither. So Sedrach, Misach, and Abdenago, came forth out of the midst of the fire.
Then were assembled the satraps, and captains, and heads of provinces, and the royal princes; and they saw the men, and perceived that the fire had not had power against their bodies, and the hair of their head was not burnt, and their coats were not scorched, nor was the smell of fire upon them.
And king Nabuchodonosor answered and said, Blessed be the God of Sedrach, Misach, and Abdenago, who has sent his angel, and delivered his servants, because they trusted in him; and they have changed the king's word, and delivered their bodies to be burnt, that they might not serve nor worship any god, except their own God.
Wherefore I publish a decree: Every people, tribe, or language, that shall speak reproachfully against the God of Sedrach, Misach, and Abdenago shall be destroyed, and their houses shall be plundered: because there is no other God who shall be able to deliver thus.
Then the king promoted Sedrach, Misach, and Abdenago, in the province of Babylon, and advanced them, and gave them authority to rule over all the Jews who were in his kingdom.
King Nabuchodonosor to all nations, tribes, and tongues, who dwell in all the earth; Peace be multiplied to you.
It seemed good to me to declare to you the signs and wonders which the most high God has wrought with me,
God be merciful to us, and bless us; and cause his face to shine upon us. Pause.
That men may know thy way on the earth, thy salvation among all nations.
Let the nations, O God, give thanks to thee; let all the nations give thanks to thee.
Let the nations rejoice and exult, for thou shalt judge the peoples in equity, and shalt guide the nations on the earth. Pause.
Let the peoples, O God, give thanks to thee; let all the peoples give thanks to thee.
The earth has yielded her fruit; let God, our God bless us.
Let God bless us; and let all the ends of the earth fear him.
As a rush of water, so is the king's heart in God's hand: he turns it whithersoever he may desire to point out.
Every man seems to himself righteous; but the Lord directs the hearts.
To do justly and to speak truth, are more pleasing to God than the blood of sacrifices.
A high-minded man is stout-hearted in his pride; and the lamp of the wicked is sin.
He that gathers treasures with a lying tongue pursues vanity on to the snares of death.
Destruction shall lodge with the ungodly; for they refuse to do justly.
To the froward God sends froward ways; for his works are pure and right.
It is better to dwell in a corner on the house-top, than in plastered rooms with unrighteousness, and in an open house.
The soul of the ungodly shall not be pitied by any man.
When an intemperate man is punished the simple becomes wiser: and a wise man understanding will receive knowledge.
A righteous man understands the hearts of the ungodly: and despises the ungodly for their wickedness.
He that stops his ears from hearing the poor, himself also shall cry, and there shall be none to hear him.
A secret gift calms anger: but he that forbears to give stirs up strong wrath.
It is the joy of the righteous to do judgment: but a holy man is abominable with evil-doers.
A man that wanders out of the way of righteousness, shall rest in the congregation of giants.
A poor man loves mirth, loving wine and oil in abundance;
and a transgressor is the abomination of a righteous man.
It is better to dwell in a wilderness than with a quarrelsome and talkative and passionate woman.
A desirable treasure will rest on the mouth of the wise; but foolish men will swallow it up.
The way of righteousness and mercy will find life and glory.
A wise man assaults strong cities, and demolishes the fortress in which the ungodly trusted.
He that keeps his mouth and his tongue keeps his soul from trouble.
A bold and self-willed and insolent man is called a pest: and he that remembers injuries is a transgressor.
Desires kill the sluggard; for his hands do not choose to do anything.
An ungodly man entertains evil desires all the day: but the righteous is unsparingly merciful and compassionate.
The sacrifices of the ungodly are abomination to the Lord, for they offer them wickedly.
A false witness shall perish; but an obedient man will speak cautiously.
An ungodly man impudently withstands with his face; but the upright man himself understands his ways.
There is no wisdom, there is no courage, there is no counsel against the ungodly.
A horse is prepared for the day of battle; but help is of the Lord.
and in this house there is nothing above me, nor has anything been kept back from me, but thou, because thou art his wifehow then shall I do this wicked thing, and sin against God?
And when she talked with Joseph day by day, and he hearkened not to her to sleep with her, so as to be with her,
it came to pass on a certain day, that Joseph went into the house to do his business, and there was no one of the household within.
that she called those that were in the house, and spoke to them, saying, See, he has brought in to us a Hebrew servant to mock ushe came in to me, saying, Lie with me, and I cried with a loud voice.
And when he heard that I lifted up my voice and cried, having left his clothes with me, he fled, and went forth out.
So she leaves the clothes by her, until the master came to his house.
And she spoke to him according to these words, saying, The Hebrew servant, whom thou broughtest in to us, came in to me to mock me, and said to me, I will lie with thee.
And there came out women in dances to meet David out of all the cities of Israel, with timbrels, and with rejoicing, and with cymbals.
And the women began the strain, and said, Saul has smitten his thousands, and David his ten thousands.
And it seemed evil in the eyes of Saul concerning this matter, and he said, To David they have given ten thousands, and to me they have given thousands. And what more can he have but the kingdom?
And Saul eyed David from that day and onward.
And it came to pass on the morrow that an evil spirit from God fell upon Saul, and he prophesied in the midst of his house. And David was playing on the harp with his hand, according to his daily custom. And Sauls spear was in his hand.
And Saul took his spear and said, I will smite David even to the wall. But David escaped twice from his presence.
And Saul was alarmed on account of David.
And he removed him from him, and made him a captain of a thousand for himself; and he went out and came in before the people.
And David was prudent in all his ways, and the Lord was with him.
And Saul saw that he was very wise, and he was afraid of him.
And all Israel and Juda loved David, because he came in and went out before the people.
And Saul said to David, Behold my elder daughter Merob, I will give her to thee to Wife, only be thou to me a mighty man and ght the wars of the Lord. And Saul said, Let not my hand be upon him, but the hand of the Philistines shall be upon him.
And David said to Saul, Who am I, and What is the life of my fathers family in Israel, that I should be the kings sonin-law?
But it came to pass at the time when Merob Sauls daughter should have been given to David, that she was given to Israel the Mothulathite to wife.
And Melchol the daughter of Saul loved David; and it was told Saul, and the thing was pleasing in his eyes.
And Saul said, I will give her to him, and she shall be a stumbling-block to him. Now the hand of the Philistines was against Saul.
And Saul charged his servants, saying, Speak ye privately to David, saying, Behold, the king delights in thee, and all his servants love thee, and do thou becomes the king's son-in-law.
And the servants of Saul spoke these words in the ears of David; and David said, Is it a light thing in your eyes to become son-in-law to the king? Whereas I am an humble man, an not honourable?
And the servants of Saul reported to him according to these words, which David spoke.
And Saul said, Thus shall ye speak to David, The king wants no gift but a hundred foreskins of the Philistines, to avenge himself on the kings enemies. Now Saul thought to cast him into the hands of the Philistines.
And the servants of Saul report these words to David, and David was well pleased to become the son-in-law to the king.
And David arose, and went, he and his men, and smote among the Philistines a hundred men: and he brought their foreskins, and he becomes the king's son-in-law, and Saul gives him Melchol his daughter to wife.
And Saul saw that the Lord was with David, and that all Israel loved him.
And he was yet more afraid of David.
Why is it that I came forth of the womb to see troubles and distresses, and my days are spent in shame?
At that time the Lord said to me, Hew for thyself two stone tables as the first, and come up to me into the mountain, and thou shalt make for thyself an ark of wood.
And thou shalt write upon the tables the words which were on the first tables which thou didst break, and thou shalt put them into the ark.
So I made an ark of boards of incorruptible wood, and I hewed tables of stone like the first, and I went up to the mountain, and the two tables were in my hand.
And he wrote upon the tables according to the first writing the ten commandments, which the Lord spoke to you in the mountain out of the midst of the fire, and the Lord gave them to me.
And I turned and came down from the mountain, and I put the tables into the ark which I had made; and there they were, as the Lord commanded me.
And the children of Israel departed from Beeroth of the sons of Jakim to Misadai: there Aaron died, and there he was buried, and Eleazar his son was priest in his stead.
Thence they departed to Gadgad; and from Gadgad to Etebatha, a land wherein are torrents of water.
At that time the Lord separated the tribe of Levi, to bear the ark of the covenant of the Lord, to stand near before the Lord, to minister and bless in his name to this day.
Therefore the Levites have no part nor inheritance among their brethren; the Lord himself is their inheritance, as he said to them.
And I remained in the mount forty days and forty nights: and the Lord heard me at that time also, and the Lord would not destroy you.
And the Lord said to me, Go, set out before this people, and let them go in and inherit the land, which I sware to their fathers to give to them.
And now, Israel, what does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, and to walk in all his ways, and to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul;
to keep the commandments of the Lord thy God, and his ordinances, all that I charge thee to-day, that it may be well with thee?
Behold, the heaven and the heaven of heavens belong to the Lord thy God, the earth and all things that are in it.
Only the Lord chose your fathers to love them, and he chose out their seed after them, even you, beyond all nations, as at this day.
Therefore ye shall circumcise the hardness of your heart, and ye shall not harden your neck.
For the Lord your God, he is God of gods, and the Lord of lords, the great, and strong, and terrible God, who does not accept persons, nor will he by any means accept a bribe:
executing judgment for the stranger and orphan and widow, and he loves the stranger to give him food and raiment.
And ye shall love the stranger; for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt.
Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and shalt cleave to him, and shalt swear by his name.
He is thy boast, and he is thy God, who has wrought in the midst of thee these great and glorious things, which thine eyes have seen.
With seventy souls your fathers went down into Egypt; but the Lord thy God has made thee as the stars of heaven in multitude.
And the men rose up and went; and Joshua charged the men who went to explore the land, saying, Go and explore the land, and come to me, and I will bring you forth a lot here before the Lord in Selo.
And they went, and explored the land: and they viewed it, and described it according to the cities, seven parts in a book, and brought the book to Joshua.
And Joshua cast the lot for them in Selo before the Lord.
And the lot of the tribe of Benjamin came forth first according to their families: and the borders of their lot came forth between the children of Juda and the children of Joseph.
And their borders were northward: the borders shall go up from Jordan behind Jericho northward, and shall go up to the mountain westward, and the issue of it shall be Baethon of Mabdara.
And the borders will go forth thence to Luz, behind Luz, from the south of it; this is Baethel: and the borders shall go down to Maatarob Orech, to the hill country, which is southward of Baethoron the lower.
And the borders shall pass through and proceed to the part that looks toward the sea, on the south, from the mountain in front of Baethoron southward, and its termination shall be at Cariath-Baal, this is Cariath-Jarin, a city of the children of Juda; this is the part toward the west.
And the south side on the part of Cariath-Baal; and the borders shall go across to Gasin, to the fountain of the water of Naphtho.
And the borders shall extend down on one side, this is in front of the forest of Sonnam, which is on the side of Emec Raphain northward, and it shall come down to Gaeenna behind Jebusai southward: it shall come down to the fountain of Rogel.
And the borders shall go across to the fountain of Baethsamys:
and shall proceed to Galiloth, which is in front by the going up of Aethamin; and they shall come down to the stone of Baeon of the sons of Ruben; and shall pass over behind Baetharaba northward, and shall go down to the borders behind the sea northward.
And the termination of the borders shall be at the creek of the salt sea northward to the side of Jordan southward: these are their southern borders.
And Jordan shall be their boundary on the east: this is the inheritance of the children of Benjamin, these are their borders round about according to their families.
And the cities of the children of Benjamin according to their families were Jericho, and Bethagaeo, and the Amecasis,
and Baethabara, and Sara, and Besana,
and Aeein, and Phara, and Ephratha,
and Carapha, and Cephira, and Moni, and Gabaa, twelve cities and their villages:
Gabaon, and Rama, and Beerotha;
and Massema, and Miron, and Amoke;
and Phira, and Caphan, and Nacan, and Selecan, and Thareela,
and Jebus (this is Jerusalem); and Gabaoth, Jarim, thirteen cities, and their villages; this is the inheritance of the sons of Benjamin according to their families.
There is a reproof that is not comely: again, some man holdeth his tongue, and he is wise.
It is much better to reprove, than to be angry secretly: and he that confesseth his fault shall be preserved from hurt.
How good is it, when thou art reproved, to shew repentance! for so shalt thou escape wilful sin.
As is the lust of an eunuch to deflower a virgin; so is he that executeth judgment with violence.
There is one that keepeth silence, and is found wise: and another by much babbling becometh hateful.
Some man holdeth his tongue, because he hath not to answer: and some keepeth silence, knowing his time.
A wise man will hold his tongue till he see opportunity: but a babbler and a fool will regard no time.
He that useth many words shall be abhorred; and he that taketh to himself authority therein shall be hated.
There is a sinner that hath good success in evil things; and there is a gain that turneth to loss.
There is a gift that shall not profit thee; and there is a gift whose recompence is double.
There is an abasement because of glory; and there is that lifteth up his head from a low estate.
There is that buyeth much for a little, and repayeth it sevenfold.
A wise man by his words maketh him beloved: but the graces of fools shall be poured out.
The gift of a fool shall do thee no good when thou hast it; neither yet of the envious for his necessity: for he looketh to receive many things for one.
He giveth little, and upbraideth much; he openeth his mouth like a crier; to day he lendeth, and to morrow will he ask it again: such an one is to be hated of God and man.
The fool saith, I have no friends, I have no thank for all my good deeds, and they that eat my bread speak evil of me.
How oft, and of how many shall he be laughed to scorn! for he knoweth not aright what it is to have; and it is all one unto him as if he had it not.
To slip upon a pavement is better than to slip with the tongue: so the fall of the wicked shall come speedily.
An unseasonable tale will always be in the mouth of the unwise.
A wise sentence shall be rejected when it cometh out of a fool's mouth; for he will not speak it in due season.
There is that is hindered from sinning through want: and when he taketh rest, he shall not be troubled.
There is that destroyeth his own soul through bashfulness, and by accepting of persons overthroweth himself.
There is that for bashfulness promiseth to his friend, and maketh him his enemy for nothing.
A lie is a foul blot in a man, yet it is continually in the mouth of the untaught.
A thief is better than a man that is accustomed to lie: but they both shall have destruction to heritage.
The disposition of a liar is dishonourable, and his shame is ever with him.
A wise man shall promote himself to honour with his words: and he that hath understanding will please great men.
He that tilleth his land shall increase his heap: and he that pleaseth great men shall get pardon for iniquity.
Presents and gifts blind the eyes of the wise, and stop up his mouth that he cannot reprove.
Wisdom that is hid, and treasure that is hoarded up, what profit is in them both?
Better is he that hideth his folly than a man that hideth his wisdom.
In mine affliction I cried to the Lord, and he hearkened to me.
Deliver my soul, O Lord, from unjust lips, and from a deceitful tongue.
What should be given to thee, and what should be added to thee, for thy crafty tongue?
Sharpened weapons of the mighty, with coals of the desert.
Woe is me, that my sojourning is prolonged; I have tabernacled among the tents of Kedar.
My soul has long been a sojourner;
I was peaceable among them that hated peace; when I spoke to them, they warred against me without a cause.
And these are the commands, and the ordinances, and the judgments, as many as the Lord our God gave commandment to teach you to do so in the land on which ye enter to inherit it.
That ye may fear the Lord your God, keep ye all his ordinances, and his commandments, which I command thee to-day, thou, and thy sons, and thy sons' sons, all the days of thy life, that ye may live many days.
Hear, therefore, O Israel, and observe to do them, that it may be well with thee, and that ye may be greatly multiplied, as the Lord God of thy fathers said that he would give thee a land flowing with milk and honey: and these are the ordinances, and the judgments, which the Lord commanded the children of Israel in the wilderness, when they had gone forth from the land of Egypt.
Hear, O Israel, The Lord our God is one Lord.
And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy mind, and with all thy soul, and all thy strength.
And these words, all that I command thee this day, shall be in thy heart and in thy soul.
And thou shalt teach them to thy children, and thou shalt speak of them sitting in the house, and walking by the way, and lying down, and rising up.
And thou shalt fasten them for a sign upon thy hand, and it shall be immoveable before thine eyes.
And ye shall write them on the lintels of your houses and of your gates.
And it shall come to pass when the Lord thy God shall have brought thee into the land which he sware to thy fathers, to Abraam, and to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give thee great and beautiful cities which thou didst not build,
houses full of all good things which thou didst not fill, wells dug in the rock which thou didst not dig, vineyards and oliveyards which thou didst not plant, then having eaten and been filled,
beware lest thou forget the Lord thy God that brought thee forth out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.
Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve; and thou shalt cleave to him, and by his name thou shalt swear.
Go ye not after other gods of the gods of the nations round about you;
for the Lord thy God in the midst of thee is a jealous God, lest the Lord thy God be very angry with thee, and destroy thee from off the face of the earth.
Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God, as ye tempted him in the temptation.
Thou shalt by all means keep the commands of the Lord thy God, the testimonies, and the ordinances, which he commanded thee.
And thou shalt do that which is pleasing and good before the Lord thy God, that it may be well with thee, and that thou mayest go in and inherit the good land, which the Lord sware to your fathers,
to chase all thine enemies from before thy face, as the Lord said.
And it shall come to pass when thy son shall ask thee at a future time, saying, What are the testimonies, and the ordinances, and the judgments, which the Lord our God has commanded us?
Then shalt thou say to thy son, We were slaves to Pharao in the land of Egypt, and the Lord brought us forth thence with a mighty hand, and with a high arm.
And the Lord wrought signs and great and grievous wonders in Egypt, on Pharao and on his house before us.
And he brought us out thence to give us this land, which he sware to give to our fathers.
And the Lord charged us to observe all these ordinances; to fear the Lord our God, that it may be well with us for ever, that we may live, as even to-day.
And there shall be mercy to us, if we take heed to keep all these commands before the Lord our God, as he has commanded us.
And the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying,
And Amos answered, and said to Amasias, I was not a prophet, nor the son of a prophet; but I was a herdman, and a gatherer of sycamore fruits.
And the Lord took me from the sheep, and the Lord said to me, Go, and prophesy to my people Israel.
And now hear the word of the Lord: Thou sayest, Prophesy not to Israel, and raise not a tumult against the house of Jacob.
Therefore thus saith the Lord; Thy wife shall be a harlot in the city, and thy sons and thy daughters shall fall by the sword, and thy land shall be measured with the line; and thou shalt die in an unclean land; and Israel shall be led captive out of his land. Thus has the Lord God shewed me.
Rescue me, O Lord, from the evil man; deliver me from the unjust man.
Who have devised injustice in their hearts; all the day they prepared war.
They have sharpened their tongue as the tongue of a serpent; the poison of asps is under their lips. Pause.
Keep me, O Lord, from the hand of the sinner; rescue me from unjust men; who have purposed to overthrow my goings.
The proud have hid a snare for me, and have stretched out ropes for snares for my feet; they set a stumbling-block for me near the path. Pause.
I said to the Lord, Thou art my God; hearken, O Lord, to the voice of my supplication.
O Lord God, the strength of my salvation; thou hast screened my head in the day of battle.
Deliver me not, O Lord, to the sinner, according to my desire: they have devised mischief against me; forsake me not, lest they should be exalted. Pause.
As for the head of them that compass me, the mischief of their lips shall cover them.
Coals of fire shall fall upon them on the earth; and thou shalt cast them down in afflictions: they shall not bear up under them.
A talkative man shall not prosper on the earth: evils shall hunt the unrighteous man to destruction.
I know that the Lord will maintain the cause of the poor, and the right of the needy ones.
Surely the righteous shall give thanks to thy name: the upright shall dwell in thy presence.
The Lord is a God of vengeance; the God of vengeance has declared himself.
Be thou exalted, thou that judgest the earth: render a reward to the proud.
How long shall sinners, O Lord, how long shall sinners boast?
They will utter and speak unrighteousness; all the workers of iniquity will speak so.
They have afflicted thy people, O Lord, and hurt thine heritage.
They have slain the widow and fatherless, and murdered the stranger.
And they said, The Lord shall not see, neither shall the God of Jacob understand.
Understand now, ye simple among the people; and ye fools, at length be wise.
He that planted the ear, does he not hear? or he that formed the eye, does not he perceive?
He that chastises the heathen, shall not he punish, even he that teaches man knowledge?
The Lord knows the thoughts of men, that they are vain.
Blessed is the man whomsoever thou shalt chasten, O Lord, and shalt teach him out of thy law;
to give him rest from evil days, until a pit be digged for the sinful one.
For the Lord will not cast off his people, neither will he forsake his inheritance;
until righteousness return to judgment, and all the upright in heart shall follow it. Pause.
Who will rise up for me against the transgressors? or who will stand up with me against the workers of iniquity?
If the Lord had not helped me, my soul had almost sojourned in Hades.
If I said, My foot has been moved;
thy mercy, O Lord, helped me. O Lord, according to the multitude of my griefs within my heart, thy consolation have soothed my soul.
Shall the throne of iniquity have fellowship with thee, which frames mischief by an ordinance?
They will hunt for the soul of the righteous, and condemn innocent blood.
But the Lord was my refuge; and my God the helper of my hope.
And he will recompense to them their iniquity and their wickedness: the Lord our God shall utterly destroy them.
And it shall be when thou shalt have entered into the land, which the Lord thy God gives thee to inherit it, and thou shalt have inherited it, and thou shalt have dwelt upon it,
that thou shalt take of the first of the fruits of thy land, which the Lord thy God gives thee, and thou shalt put them into a basket, and thou shalt go to the place which the Lord thy God shall choose to have his name called there.
And thou shalt come to the priest who shall be in those days, and thou shalt say to him, I testify this day to the Lord my God, that I am come into the land which the Lord sware to our fathers to give to us.
And the priest shall take the basket out of thine hands, and shall set it before the altar of the Lord thy God:
and he shall answer and say before the Lord thy God, My father abandoned Syria, and went down into Egypt, and sojourned there with a small number, and became there a mighty nation and a great multitude.
And the Egyptians afflicted us, and humbled us, and imposed hard tasks on us:
and we cried to the Lord our God, and the Lord heard our voice, and saw our humiliation, and our labour, and our affliction.
And the Lord brought us out of Egypt himself with his great strength, and his mighty hand, and his high arm, and with great visions, and with signs, and with wonders.
And he brought us into this place, and gave us this land, a land flowing with milk and honey.
And now, behold, I have brought the first of the fruits of the land, which thou gavest me, O Lord, a land flowing with milk and honey: and thou shalt leave it before the Lord thy God, and thou shalt worship before the Lord thy God;
They shall die of grievous death; they shall not be lamented, nor buried; they shall be for an example on the face of the earth; and they shall be for the wild beasts of the land, and for the birds of the sky: they shall fall by the sword, and shall be consumed with famine.
For thus saith the Lord God of Israel; Behold, I will make to cease out of this place before your eyes, and in your days, the voice of joy, and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride.
And it shall come to pass, when thou shalt report to this people all these words, and they shall say to thee, Wherefore has the Lord pronounced against us all these evils? what is our unrighteousness? and what is our sin which we have sinned before the Lord our God?
Then thou shalt say to them, Because your fathers forsook me, saith the Lord, and went after strange gods and served them, and worshipped them, and forsook me, and kept not my law;
(and ye sinned worse than your fathers; for, behold, ye walk every one after the lusts of your own evil heart, so as not to hearken to me);
therefore I will cast you off from this good land into a land which neither ye nor your fathers have known; and ye shall serve their other gods, who shall have no mercy upon you.
Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the Lord, when they shall no more say, The Lord lives, that brought up the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt;
but, The Lord lives, who brought up the house of Israel from the land of the north, and from all countries whither they were thrust out: and I will restore them to their own land, which I gave to their fathers.
Behold, I will send many fishers, saith the Lord, and they shall fish them; and afterward I will send many hunters, and they shall hunt them upon every mountain, and upon every hill, and out of the holes of the rocks.
For mine eyes are upon all their ways; and their iniquities have not been hidden from mine eyes.
And I will recompense their mischiefs doubly, and their sins, whereby they have profaned my land with the carcases of their abominations, and with their iniquities, whereby they have trespassed against mine inheritance.
O Lord, thou art my strength, and mine help, and my refuge in days of evil: to thee the Gentiles shall come from the end of the earth, and shall say, How vain were the idols which our fathers procured to themselves, and there is no help in them.
Will a man make gods for himself, whereas these are no gods?
Therefore, behold, I will at this time manifest my hand to them, and will make known to them my power; and they shall know that my name is the Lord.
The word of the Lord which came to Joel the son of Bathuel.
Hear these words, ye elders, and hearken all ye that inhabit the land. Have such things happen in your days, or in the days of your fathers?
Gird yourselves with sackcloth, and lament, ye priests: mourn, ye that serve at the altar: go in, sleep in sackcloths, ye that minister to God: for the meat-offering and drink-offering are withheld from the house of your God.
Sanctify a fast, proclaim a solemn service, gather the elders and all the inhabitants of the land into the house of your God, and cry earnestly to the Lord,
Alas, Alas, Alas for the day! for the day of the Lord is nigh, and it will come as trouble upon trouble.
Your meat has been destroyed before your eyes, joy and gladness from out of the house of your God.
The word that came to Jeremias from the Lord (now Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon, and all his army, and all the country of his dominion, were warring against Jerusalem, and against all the cities of Juda,) saying,
Thus has the Lord said; Go to Sedekias king of Juda, and thou shalt say to him, Thus has the Lord said, This city shall certainly be delivered into the hands of the king of Babylon, and he shall take it, and shall burn it with fire:
and thou shalt not escape out of his hand, but shalt certainly be taken, and shalt be given into his hands; and thine eyes shall see his eyes, and thou shalt enter into Babylon.
But hear the word of the Lord, O Sedekias king of Juda; Thus saith the Lord,
Thou shalt die in peace: and as they wept for thy fathers that reigned before thee, they shall weep also for thee, saying, Ah lord! and they shall lament for thee down to the grave: for I have spoken the word, said the Lord.
And Jeremias spoke to king Sedekias all these words in Jerusalem.
And the host of the king of Babylon warred against Jerusalem, and against the cities of Juda, and against Lachis, and against Azeca: for these strong cities were left among the cities of Juda.
The word that came from the Lord to Jeremias, after king Sedekias had concluded a covenant with the people, to proclaim a release;
That every one should set at liberty his servant, and every one has handmaid, the Hebrew man and Hebrew woman, that no man of Juda should be a bondman.
Then all the nobles, and all the people who had entered into the covenant, engaging to set free every one his man-servant, and every one his maid, turned,
and gave them over to be men-servants and maid-servants.
And the word of the Lord came to Jeremias, saying,
Thus saith the Lord; I made a covenant with your fathers in the day wherein I took them out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage, saying,
When six years are accomplished, thou shalt set free thy brother the Hebrew, who shall be sold to thee: for he shall serve thee six years, and then thou shalt let him go free: but they hearkened not to me, and inclined not their ear.
And this day they turned to do that which was right in my sight, to proclaim every one the release of his neighbour; and they had concluded a covenant before me, in the house whereon my name is called.
But ye turned and profaned my name, to bring back every one his servant, and every one his handmaid, whom ye had sent forth free and at their own disposal, to be to you men-servants and maid-servants.
Therefore thus said the Lord; Ye have not hearkened to me, to proclaim a release every one to his neighbour: behold, I proclaim a release to you, to the sword, and to the pestilence, and to the famine; and I will give you up to dispersion among all the kingdoms of the earth.
And I will give the men that have transgressed my covenant, who have not kept my covenant, which they made before me, the calf which they prepared to sacrifice with it,
the princes of Juda, and the men in power, and the priests, and the people;
I will even give them to their enemies, and their carcases shall be food for the birds of the sky and for the wild beasts of the earth.
And I will give Sedekias king of Judea, and their princes, into the hands of their enemies, and the host of the king of Babylon shall come upon them that run away from them.
Behold, I will give command, saith the Lord, and will bring them back to this land; and they shall fight against it, and take it, and burn it with fire, and the cities of Juda; and I will make them desolate without inhabitants.
Better is a morsel with pleasure in peace, than a house full of many good things and unjust sacrifices, with strife.
A wise servant shall have rule over foolish masters, and shall divide portions among brethren.
As silver and gold are tried in a furnace, so are choice hearts with the Lord.
A bad man hearkens to the tongue of transgressors: but a righteous man attends not to false lips.
He that laughs at the poor provokes him that made him; and he that rejoices at the destruction of another shall not be held guiltless: but he that has compassion shall find mercy.
Children's children are the crown of old men; and their fathers are the glory of children. The faithful has the whole world full of wealth; but the faithless not even a farthing.
Faithful lips will not suit a fool; nor lying lips a just man.
Instruction is to them that use it a gracious reward; and whithersoever it may turn, it shall prosper.
He that conceals injuries seeks love; but he that hates to hide them separates friends and kindred.
A threat breaks down the heart of a wise man; but a fool, though scourged, understands not.
Every bad man stirs up strifes: but the Lord will send out against him an unmerciful messenger.
Care may befall a man of understanding; but fools will meditate evils.
Whoso rewards evil for good, evil shall not be removed from his house.
Rightful rule gives power to words; but sedition and strife precede poverty.
He that pronounces the unjust just, and the just unjust, is unclean and abominable with God.
Why has the fool wealth? for a senseless man will not be able to purchase wisdom. He that exalts his own house seeks ruin; and he that turns aside from instruction shall fall into mischief.
Have thou a friend for every time, and let brethren be useful in distress; for on this account are they born.
A foolish man applauds and rejoices over himself, as he also that becomes surety would make himself responsible for his own friends.
A lover of sin rejoices in strifes;
and the hard-hearted man comes not in for good. A man of a changeful tongue will fall into mischiefs;
and the heart of a fool is grief to its possessor. A father rejoices not over an uninstructed son; but a wise son gladdens his mother.
A glad heart promotes health; but the bones of a sorrowful man dry up.
The ways of a man who unjustly receives gifts in his bosom do not prosper; and an ungodly man perverts the ways of righteousness.
The countenance of a wise man is sensible; but the eyes of a fool go to the ends of the earth.
A foolish son is a cause of anger to his father, and grief to her that bore him.
It is not right to punish a righteous man, nor is it holy to plot against righteous princes.
He that forbears to utter a hard word is discreet, and a patient man is wise.
Wisdom shall be imputed to a fool who asks after wisdom: and he who holds his peace shall seem to be sensible.
The Proverbs of Solomon son of David, who reigned in Israel;
to know wisdom and instruction, and to perceive words of understanding;
to receive also hard saying, and to understand true justice, and how to direct judgment;
that he might give subtlety to the simple, and to the young man discernment and understanding.
For by the hearing of these a wise man will be wiser, and man of understanding will gain direction;
and will understand a parable, and a dark speech; the saying of the wise also, and riddles.
The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom; and there is good understanding to all that practise it: and piety toward God is the beginning of discernment; but the ungodly will set at nought wisdom and instruction.
Hear, my son, the instruction of thy father, and reject not the rules of thy mother.
For thou shalt receive for thine head a crown of graces, and a chain of gold round thy neck.
My son, let not ungodly men lead thee astray, neither consent thou to them.
If they should exhort thee, saying, Come with us, partake in blood, and let us unjustly hide the just man in the earth:
and let us swallow him alive, as Hades would, and remove the memorial of him from the earth:
let us seize on his valuable property, and let us fill our houses with spoils:
but do thou cast in thy lot with us, and let us all provide a common purse, and let us have one pouch:
go not in the way with them, but turn aside thy foot from their paths:
For their feet run to do evil, and are swift to shed blood.
for nets are not without cause spread for birds.
For they that are concerned in murder store up evils for themselves; and the overthrow of transgressors is evil.
These are the ways of all that perform lawless deeds; for by ungodliness they destroy their own life.
Wisdom sings aloud in passages, and in the broad places speaks boldly.
And she makes proclamation on the top of the walls, and sits by the gates of princes; and at the gates of the city boldly says,
So long as the simple cleave to justice, they shall not be ashamed: but the foolish being lovers of haughtiness, having become ungodly have hated knowledge, and are become subject to reproofs.
Behold, I will bring forth to you the utterance of my breath, and I will instruct you in my speech.
Since I called, and ye did not hearken; and I spoke at length, and ye gave no heed;
but ye set at nought my counsels, and disregarded my reproofs;
therefore I also will laugh at your destruction; and I will rejoice against you when ruin comes upon you:
yea when dismay suddenly comes upon you, and your overthrow shall arrive like a tempest; and when tribulation and distress shall come upon you, or when ruin shall come upon you.
For it shall be that when ye call upon me, I will not hearken to you: wicked men shall seek me, but shall not find me.
For they hated wisdom, and did not choose the word of the Lord:
neither would they attend to my counsels, but derided my reproofs.
Therefore shall they eat the fruits of their own way, and shall be filled with their own ungodliness.
For because they wronged the simple, they shall be slain; and an inquisition shall ruin the ungodly.
But he that hearkens to me shall dwell in confidence, and shall rest securely from all evil.
And the men said to Lot, Hast thou here sons-in-law, or sons or daughters, or if thou hast any other friend in the city, bring them out of this place.
For we are going to destroy this place; for their cry has been raised up before the Lord, and the Lord has sent us to destroy it.
And Lot went out, and spoke to his sons-in-law who had married his daughters, and said, Rise up, and depart out of this place, for the Lord is about to destroy the city; but he seemed to be speaking absurdly before his sons-in-law.
But when it was morning, the angels hastened Lot, saying, Arise and take thy wife, and thy two daughters whom thou hast, and go forth; lest thou also be destroyed with the iniquities of the city.
And it came to pass when they brought them out, that they said, Save thine own life by all means; look not round to that which is behind, nor stay in all the country round about, escape to the mountain, lest perhaps thou be overtaken together with them.
And Lot said to them, I pray, Lord,
since thy servant has found mercy before thee, and thou hast magnified thy righteousness, in what thou doest towards me that my soul may live, but I shall not be able to escape to the mountain, lest perhaps the calamity overtake me and I die.
Behold this city is near for me to escape thither, which is a small one, and there shall I be preserved, is it not little? and my soul shall live because of thee.
And it came to pass on the morrow, that the elder said to the younger, Behold, I slept yesternight with our father, let us make him drink wine in this night also, and do thou go in and sleep with him, and let us raise up seed of our father.
So they made their father drink wine in that night also, and the younger went in and slept with her father, and he knew not when he slept, nor when he arose.
And the two daughters of Lot conceived by their father.
And it shall come to pass when all these things shall have come upon thee, the blessing and the curse, which I have set before thy face, and thou shalt call them to mind among all the nations, wherein the Lord shall have scattered thee,
and shalt return to the Lord thy God, and shalt hearken to his voice, according to all things which I charge thee this day, with all thy heart, and with all thy soul;
then the Lord shall heal thine iniquities, and shall pity thee, and shall again gather thee out from all the nations, among which the Lord has scattered thee.
If thy dispersion be from one end of heaven to the other, thence will the Lord thy God gather thee, and thence will the Lord thy God take thee.
And the Lord thy God shall bring thee in from thence into the land which thy fathers have inherited, and thou shalt inherit it; and he will do thee good, and multiply thee above thy fathers.
And the Lord shall purge thy heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, that thou mayest live.
And the Lord thy God will put these curses upon thine enemies, and upon those that hate thee, who have persecuted thee.
And thou shalt return and hearken to the voice of the Lord thy God, and shall keep his commands, all that I charge thee this day.
And the Lord thy God shall bless thee in every work of thine hands, in the offspring of thy body, and in the offspring of thy cattle, and in the fruits of thy land, because the Lord thy God will again rejoice over thee for good, as he rejoiced over thy fathers:
if thou wilt hearken to the voice of the Lord thy God, to keep his commandments, and his ordinances, and his judgments written in the book of this law, if thou turn to the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul.
For this command which I give thee this day is not grievous, neither is it far from thee.
It is not in heaven above, as if there were one saying, Who shall go up for us into heaven, and shall take it for us, and we will hear and do it?
Neither is it beyond the sea, saying, Who will go over for us to the other side of the sea, and take it for us, and make it audible to us, and we will do it?
The word is very near thee, in thy mouth, and in thine heart, and in thine hands to do it.
Behold, I have set before thee this day life and death, good and evil.
If thou wilt hearken to the commands of the Lord thy God, which I command thee this day, to love the Lord thy God, to walk in all his ways, and to keep his ordinances, and his judgments; then ye shall live, and shall be many in number, and the Lord thy God shall bless thee in all the land into which thou goest to inherit it.
But if thy heart change, and thou wilt not hearken, and thou shalt go astray and worship other gods, and serve them,
I declare to you this day, that ye shall utterly perish, and ye shall by no means live long upon the land, into which ye go over Jordan to inherit it.
I call both heaven and earth to witness this day against you, I have set before you life and death, the blessing and the curse: choose thou life, that thou and thy seed may live;
to love the Lord thy God, to hearken to his voice, and cleave to him; for this is thy life, and the length of thy days, that thou shouldest dwell upon the land, which the Lord sware to thy fathers, Abraam, and Isaac, and Jacob, to give to them.
O Lord, incline thine ear, and hearken to me; for I am poor and needy.
Preserve my soul, for I am holy; save thy servant, O God, who hopes in thee.
Pity me, O Lord: for to thee will I cry all the day.
Rejoice the sold of thy servant: for to thee, O Lord, have I lifted up my soul.
For thou, O Lord, art kind, and gentle; and plenteous in mercy to all that call upon thee.
Give ear to my prayer, o Lord; and attend to the voice of my supplication.
In the day of my trouble I cried to thee: for thou didst hear me.
There is none like to thee, O Lord, among the god; and there are no works like to thy works.
All nations whom thou hast made shall come, and shall worship before thee, O Lord; and shall glorify thy name.
For thou art great, and doest wonders: thou art the only and the great God.
Guide me, O Lord, in thy way, and I will walk in thy truth: let my heart rejoice, that I may fear thy name.
I will give thee thanks, O Lord my God, with all my heart; and I will glorify thy name for ever.
For thy mercy is great toward me; and thou hast delivered my soul from the lowest hell.
O God, transgressors have risen up against me, and an assembly of violent men have sought my life; and have not set thee before them.
But thou, O Lord God, art compassionate and merciful, long-suffering, and abundant in mercy and true.
Look thou upon me, and have mercy upon me: give thy strength to thy servant, and save the son of thine handmaid.
Establish with me a token for good; and let them that hate me see it and be ashamed; because thou, O Lord, hast helped me, and comforted me.
How long, O Lord, shall I cry out, and thou wilt not hearken? how long shall I cry out to thee being injured, and thou wilt not save?
Wherefore hast thou shown me troubles and griefs to look upon, misery and ungodliness? judgment is before me, and the judge receives a reward.
Therefore the law is frustrated, and judgment proceeds not effectually, for the ungodly man prevails over the just; therefore perverse judgment will proceed.
Behold, ye despisers, and look, and wonder marvelously, and vanish: for I work a work in your days, which ye will in no wise believe, though a man declare it to you.
Wherefore, behold, I stir up the Chaldeans, the bitter and hasty nation, that walks upon the breadth of the earth, to inherit tabernacles not his own.
He is terrible and famous; his judgment shall proceed of himself, and his dignity shall come out of himself.
And his horses shall bound more swiftly than leopards, and they are fiercer than the wolves of Arabia: and his horsemen shall ride forth, and shall rush from far; and they shall fly as an eagle hasting to eat.
Destruction shall come upon ungodly men, resisting with their adverse front, and he shall gather the captivity as the sand.
And he shall be at his ease with kings, and princes are his toys, and he shall mock at every strong-hold, and shall cast a mound, and take possession of it.
Then shall he change his spirit, and he shall pass through, and make an atonement, saying, This strength belongs to my god.
Desire not a multitude of unprofitable children, neither delight in ungodly sons.
Though they multiply, rejoice not in them, except the fear of the Lord be with them.
Trust not thou in their life, neither respect their multitude: for one that is just is better than a thousand; and better it is to die without children, than to have them that are ungodly.
For by one that hath understanding shall the city be replenished: but the kindred of the wicked shall speedily become desolate.
Many such things have I seen with mine eyes, and mine ear hath heard greater things than these.
In the congregation of the ungodly shall a fire be kindled; and in a rebellious nation wrath is set on fire.
He was not pacified toward the old giants, who fell away in the strength of their foolishness.
Neither spared he the place where Lot sojourned, but abhorred them for their pride.
He pitied not the people of perdition, who were taken away in their sins:
Nor the six hundred thousand footmen, who were gathered together in the hardness of their hearts.
And if there be one stiffnecked among the people, it is marvel if he escape unpunished: for mercy and wrath are with him; he is mighty to forgive, and to pour out displeasure.
As his mercy is great, so is his correction also: he judgeth a man according to his works
The sinner shall not escape with his spoils: and the patience of the godly shall not be frustrate.
Make way for every work of mercy: for every man shall find according to his works.
Say not thou, I will hide myself from the Lord: shall any remember me from above? I shall not be remembered among so many people: for what is my soul among such an infinite number of creatures?
Behold, the heaven, and the heaven of heavens, the deep, and the earth, and all that therein is, shall be moved when he shall visit.
The mountains also and foundations of the earth be shaken with trembling, when the Lord looketh upon them.
No heart can think upon these things worthily: and who is able to conceive his ways?
It is a tempest which no man can see: for the most part of his works are hid.
Who can declare the works of his justice? or who can endure them? for his covenant is afar off, and the trial of all things is in the end.
He that wanteth understanding will think upon vain things: and a foolish man erring imagineth follies.
My son, hearken unto me, and learn knowledge, and mark my words with thy heart.
I will shew forth doctrine in weight, and declare his knowledge exactly.
The works of the Lord are done in judgment from the beginning: and from the time he made them he disposed the parts thereof.
He garnished his works for ever, and in his hand are the chief of them unto all generations: they neither labour, nor are weary, nor cease from their works.
None of them hindereth another, and they shall never disobey his word.
After this the Lord looked upon the earth, and filled it with his blessings.
With all manner of living things hath he covered the face thereof; and they shall return into it again.
and the man that has been cleansed shall wash his garments, and shall shave off all his hair, and shall wash himself in water, and shall be clean; and after that he shall go into the camp, and shall remain out of his house seven days.
And it shall come to pass on the seventh day, he shall shave off all his hair, his head and his beard, and his eye-brows, even all his hair shall he shave; and he shall wash his garments, and wash his body with water, and shall be clean.
And on the eighth day he shall take two lambs without spot of a year old, and one ewe lamp without spot of a year old, and three-tenths of fine flour for sacrifice kneaded with oil, and one small cup of oil.
And the priest that cleanses shall present the man under purification, and these offerings before the Lord, at the door of the tabernacle of witness.
And the priest shall take one lamb, and offer him for a trespass-offering, and the cup of oil, and set them apart for a special offering before the Lord.
and they shall kill the lamb in the place where they kill the whole-burnt-offerings, and the sin-offerings, in the holy places; for it is a sin-offering: as the trespass-offering, it belongs to the priest, it is most holy.
And the priest shall take of the blood of the trespass-offering, and the priest shall put it on the tip of the right ear of the person under cleansing, and on the thumb of his right hand, and on the great toe of his right foot.
And the priest shall take of the cup of oil, and shall pour it upon his own left hand.
And he shall dip with the finger of his right hand into some of the oil that is in his left hand, and he shall sprinkle with his finger seven times before the Lord.
And the remaining oil that is in his hand, the priest shall put on the tip of the right ear of him that is under cleansing, and on the thumb of his right hand, and on the great toe of his right foot, on the place of the blood of the trespass-offering.
And the remaining oil that is on the hand of the priest, the priest shall put on the head of the cleansed leper, and the priest shall make atonement for him before the Lord.
And the priest shall sacrifice the sin-offering, and the priest shall make atonement for the person under purification to cleanse him from his sin, and afterwards the priest shall slay the whole-burnt-offering.
And the priest shall offer the whole-burnt-offering, and the sacrifice upon the altar before the Lord; and the priest shall make atonement for him, and he shall be cleansed.
And if he should be poor, and cannot afford so much, he shall take one lamb for his transgression for a separate-offering, so as to make propitiation for him, and a tenth deal of fine flour mingled with oil for a sacrifice, and one cup of oil,
and two turtle-doves, or two young pigeons, as he can afford; and the one shall be for a sin-offering, and the other for a whole-burnt-offering.
And he shall bring them on the eighth day, to purify him, to the priest, to the door of the tabernacle of witness before the Lord.
And the priest shall take the lamb of the trespass-offering, and the cup of oil, and place them for a set-offering before the Lord.
And he shall slay the lamb of the trespass-offering; and the priest shall take of the blood of the trespass-offering, and put it on the tip of the right ear of him that is under purification, and on the thumb of his right hand, and on the great toe of his right foot.
And the priest shall pour of the oil on his own left hand.
And the priest shall sprinkle with the finger of his right hand some of the oil that is in his left hand seven times before the Lord.
And the priest shall put of the oil that is on his hand on the tip of the right ear of him that is under purification, and on the thumb of his right hand, and on the great toe of his right foot, on the place of the blood of the trespass-offering.
And that which is left of the oil which is on the hand of the priest he shall put on the head of him that is purged, and the priest shall make atonement for him before the Lord.
But the olives said to them, Shall I leave my fatness, with which men shall glorify God, and go to be promoted over the trees?
And the trees said to the fig-tree, Come, reign over us.
But the fig-tree said to them, Shall I leave my sweetness an my good fruits, and go to be promoted over the trees?
And the trees said to the vine, Come, reign over us.
And the vine said to them, Shall I leave my wine that cheers God and men, and go to be promoted over the trees?
Then all the trees said to the bramble, Come thou and reign over us.
And the bramble said to the trees, If ye in truth anoint me to reign over you, come, stand under my shadow; and if not, let fire come out from me and devour the cedars of Libanus.
And now, if ye have done it in truth and integrity, and have made Abimelech king, and if ye have wrought well with Jerobaal, and with his house, and if ye have done to him according to the reward of his hand,
as my father fought for you, and put his life in jeopardy, and delivered you out of the hand of Madiam;
and ye are risen up this day against the house of my father, and have slain his sons, being seventy men, upon one stone, and have made Abimelech the son of his bondwoman king over the men of Sicima, because he is your brother:
if then ye have done truly and faithfully with Jerobaal, and with his house this day, rejoice ye in Abimelech, and let him also rejoice over you:
but if not, let fire come out from Abimelech, and devour the men of Sicima, and the house of Bethmaalo; and let fire come out from the men of Sicima and from the house of Bethmaalo, and devour Abimelech.
And Joatham fled, and ran away, and went as far as Baeer, and dwelt there out of the way of his brother Abimelech.
And Abimelech reigned over Israel three years.
And God sent an evil spirit between Abimelech and the men of Sicima; and the men of Sicima dealt treacherously with the house of Abimelech:
to bring the injury done to the seventy sons of Jerobaal, and to lay their blood upon their brother Abimelech, who slew them, and upon the men of Sicima, because they strengthened his hands to slay his brethren.
And the men of Sicima set liers in wait against him on the top of the mountains, and robbed every one who passed by them on the way; and it was reported to the king Abimelech.
And Gaal son of Jobel came, and his brethren, and passed by Sicima, and the men of Sicima trusted in him.
And they went out into the field, and gathered their grapes, and trod them, and made merry; and they brought the grapes into the house of their god, and ate and drank, and cursed Abimelech.
And Gaal the son of Jobel said, Who is Abimelech, and who is the son of Sychem, that we should serve him? Is he not the son of Jerobaal, and is not Zebul his steward, his servant with the son of Emmor the father of Sychem? and why should we serve him?
And would that this people were under my hand! then would I remove Abimelech, and I would say to him, Multiply thy host, and come out.
And Zebul the ruler of the city heard the words of Gaal the son of Jobel, and he was very angry.
And he sent messengers to Abimelech secretly, saying, Behold, Gaal the son of Jobel and his brethren are come to Sychem; and behold, they have besieged the city against thee.
And now rise up by night, thou and the people with thee, and lay wait in the field.
And it shall come to pass in the morning at sunrising, thou shalt rise up early and draw toward the city; and behold, he and the people with him will come forth against thee, and thou shalt do to him according to thy power.
And Abimelech and all the people with him rose up by night, and formed an ambuscade against Sychem in four companies.
And Gaal the son of Jobel went forth, and stood by the door of the gate of the city: and Abimelech and the people with him rose up from the ambuscade.
And Gaal the son of Jobel saw the people, and said to Zebul, Behold, a people comes down from the top of the mountains: and Zebul said to him, Thou seest the shadow of the mountains as men.
And Gaal continued to speak and said, Behold, a people comes down westward from the part bordering on the middle of the land, and another company comes by the way of Helon Maonenim.
And Zebul said to him, And where is thy mouth as thou spokest, Who is Abimelech that we should serve him? Is not this the people whom thou despisedst? go forth now, and set the battle in array against him.
And Gaal went forth before the men of Sychem, and set the battle in array against Abimelech.
And Abimelech pursued him, and he fled from before him; and many fell down slain as far as the door of the gate.
And Abimelech entered into Arema, and Zebul cast out Gaal and his brethren, so that they should not dwell in Sychem.
And it came to pass on the second day that the people went out into the field, and one brought word to Abimelech.
And he took the people, and divided them into three companies, and formed an ambush in the field; and he looked, and, behold, the people went forth out of the city, and he rose up against them, and smote them.
And Abimelech and the chiefs of companies that were with him rushed forward, and stood by the door of the gate of the city; and the two other companies rushed forward upon all that were in the field, and smote them.
And Abimelech fought against the city all that day, and took the city, and slew the people that were in it, and destroyed the city, and sowed it with salt.
And all the men of the tower of Sychem heard, and came to the gathering of Baethel-berith.
And it was reported to Abimelech, that all the men of the tower of Sychem were gathered together.
And Abimelech went up to the mount of Selmon, and all the people that were with him; and Abimelech took an axe in his hand, and cut down a branch of a tree, and took it, and laid it on his shoulders; and said to the people that were with him, What ye see me doing, do quickly as I.
And they cut down likewise even every man a branch, and went after Abimelech, and laid them against the place of gathering, and burnt the place of gathering over them with fire; and they died, even all the men of the tower of Sicima, about a thousand men and women.
And Abimelech went out of Baethel-berith, and encamped against Thebes, and took it.
And there was a strong tower in the midst of the city; and thither all the men and the women of the city fled, and shut the door without them, and went up on the roof of the tower.
And Abimelech drew near to the tower, and they besieged it; and Abimelech drew near to the door of the tower to burn it with fire.
And a woman cast a piece of a millstone upon the head of Abimelech, and broke his skull.
And he cried out quickly to the young man his armour-bearer, and said to him, Draw thy sword, and slay me, lest at any time they should say, A woman slew him: and his young man thrust him through and he died.
And the men of Israel saw that Abimelech was dead; and they went each to his place.
So God requited the wickedness of Abimelech, which he wrought against his father, in slaying his seventy brethren.
And all the wickedness of the men of Sychem God requited upon their head; and the curse of Joatham the son of Jerobaal came upon them.
Save me, O Lord; for the godly man has failed; for truth is diminished from among the children of men.
Every one has spoken vanity to his neighbour: their lips are deceitful, they have spoken with a double heart.
Let the Lord destroy all the deceitful lips, and the tongue that speaks great words:
who have said, We will magnify our tongue; our lips are our own: who is Lord of us?
Because of the misery of the poor, and because of the sighing of the needy, now will I arise, saith the Lord, I will set them in safety; I will speak to them thereof openly.
The oracles of the Lord are pure oracles; as silver tried in the fire, proved in a furnace of earth, purified seven times.
Thou, O Lord, shalt keep us, and shalt preserve us, from this generation, and for ever.
The ungodly walk around: according to thy greatness thou has greatly exalted the sons of men.
And when a certain day arrived, Jonathan the son of Saul said to the young man that bore his armour, Come, and let us go over to Messab of the Philistines that is on the other side yonder; but he told not his father.
And Saul sat on the top of the hill under the pomegranate tree that is in Magdon, and there were with him about six hundred men.
And Achia son of Achitob, the brother of Jochabed the son of Phinees, the son of Heli, was the priest of God in Selom wearing an ephod: and the people knew not that Jonathan was gone.
And in the midst of the passage whereby Jonathan sought to pass over to the encampment of the Philistines, there was both a sharp rock on this side, and a sharp rock on the other side: the name of the one was Bases, and the name of the other Senna.
The one way was northward to one coming to Machmas, and the other way was southward to one coming to Gabae.
And Jonathan said to the young man that bore his armour, Come, let us go over to Messab of these uncircumcised, if peradventure the Lord may do something for us; for the Lord is not straitened to save by many or by few.
And his armour-bearer said to him, Do all that thine heart inclines toward: behold, I am with thee, my heart is as thy heart.
And Jonathan said, Behold, we will go over to the men, and will come down suddenly upon them.
If they should say thus to us, Stand aloof there until we shall send you word; then we will stand still by ourselves, and will not go up against them.
But if they should say thus to us, Come up to us; then will we go up, for the Lord has delivered them into our hands; this shall be a sign to us.
And they both went in to Messab of the Philistines; and the Philistines said, Behold, the Hebrews come forth out of their Caves, where they had hidden themselves.
And the men of Messab answered Jonathan and his armour-bearer, and said, Come up to us, and we will shew you a thing: and Jonathan said to his armour-bearer, Come up after me, for the Lord has delivered them into the hands of Israel.
And Jonathan went up on his hands and feet, and his armour-bearer with him; and they looked on the face of Jonathan, and he smote them, and his armour-bearer did smite them after him.
And the first slaughter which Jonathan and his armour-bearer effected was twenty men, with darts and slings, and pebbles of the field.
And there was dismay in the camp, and in the field; and all the people in Messab, and the spoilers were amazed; and they would not act, and the land was terror-struck, and there was dismay from the lord.
And the watchmen of Saul beheld in Gabaa of Benjamin, and, behold, the army was thrown into confusion on every side.
And Saul said to the people with him, Number yourselves now, and see who has gone out from you: and they numbered themselves, and behold, Jonathan and his armour-bearer were not found.
And Saul said to Achia, Bring the ephod; for he wore the ephod in that day before Israel.
And it came to pass while Saul was speaking to the priest, that the sound in the camp of the Philistines continued to increase greatly; and Saul said to the priest, Withdraw thy hands.
And Saul went up and all the people that were with him, and they come to the battle: and, behold, every man's sword was against his neighbour, a very great confusion.
And the servants who had been before with the Philistines, who had gone up to the army, turned themselves also to be with the Israelites who were with Saul and Jonathan.
And all the Israelites who were hidden in mount Ephraim heard also that the Philistines fled; and they also gather themselves after them to battle: and the Lord saved Israel in that day; and the war passed through Bamoth; and all the people with Saul were about ten thousand men.
And the battle extended itself to every city in the mount Ephraim.
And Saul committed a great trespass of ignorance in that day, and he lays a curse on the people, saying, Cursed is the man who shall eat bread before the evening; so I will avenge myself on my enemy: and none of the people tasted bread, though all the land was dining.
And Jaal was a wood abounding in swarms of bees on the face of the ground.
And the people went into the place of the bees, and, behold, they continued speaking; and, behold, there was none that put his hand to his mouth, for the people feared the oath of the Lord.
And Jonathan had not heard when his father adjured the people; and he reached forth the end of the staff that was in his hand, an dipped it into the honeycomb, and returned his hand to his mouth, and his eyes recovered their sight.
And one of the people answered and said, Thy father solemnly adjured the people, saying, Cursed is the man who shall eat bread to-day. And the people were very faint,
and Jonathan knew it, and said, My father has destroyed the land: see how my eyes have received sight now that I have tasted a little of this honey.
Surely if the people had this day eaten freely of the spoils of their enemies which they found, the slaughter among the Philistines would have been greater.
And on that day he smote some of the Philistines in Machmas; and the people were very weary.
And the people turned to the spoil; and the people took flocks, and herds, and calves, and slew them on the ground, and the people ate with the blood.
And it was reported to Saul, saying, The people have sinned against the Lord, eating with the blood: and Saul said, Out of Getthaim roll a great stone to me hither.
And Saul said, Disperse yourselves among the people, and tell them to bring hither every one his calf, and every one his sheep: and let them slay it on this stone and sin not against the Lord in eating with the blood: and the people brought each one that which was in his hand, and they slew them there.
And Saul built an altar there to the Lord: this was the first altar that Saul built to the Lord.
And Saul said, Let us go down after the Philistines this night, and let us plunder among them till the day break, and let us not leave a man among them. And they said, Do all that is good in thy sight: and the priest said, let us draw nigh hither to God.
And Saul enquired of God, If I go down after the Philistines, wilt thou deliver them into the hands of Israel? And he answered him not in that day.
And Saul said, Bring hither all the chiefs of Israel, and know and see by whom this sin has been committed this day.
For as the Lord lives who has saved Israel, if answer should be against my son Jonathan, he shall surely die. And there was no one that answered out of all the people.
And he said to all the men of Israel, Ye shall be under subjection, and I an Jonathan my son will be under subjection: and the people said to Saul, Do that which is good in thy sight.
And Saul said, O Lord God of Israel, why hast thou not answered thy servant this day? is the iniquity in me, or in Jonathan my son? Lord God of Israel, give clear manifestations; and if the lot should declare this, give, I pray thee, to thy people of Israel, give, I pray, holiness. And Jonathan and Saul are taken, and the people escaped.
And Saul said, Cast lots between me and my son Jonathan: whomsoever the Lord shall cause to be taken by lot, let him die: and the people said to Saul, This thing is not to be done: and Saul prevailed against the people, and they cast lots between him and Jonathan his son, and Jonathan is taken by lot.
And Saul said to Jonathan, Tell me what thou hast done: and Jonathan told him, and said, I did indeed taste a little honey, with the end of my staff that was in my hand, and, lo! I am to die.
And Saul said to him, God do so to me, and more also, thou shalt surely die to-day.
And the people said to Saul, Shall he that has wrought this great salvation in Israel be put to death this day? As the Lord lives, there shall not fall to the ground one of the hairs of his head; for the people of God have wrought successfully this day. And the people prayed for Jonathan in that day, and he died not.
And Saul went up from following the Philistines; and the Philistines departed to their place.
And Saul received the kingdom, by lot he inherits the office of ruling over Israel: and he fought against all his enemies round about, against Moab, and against the children of Ammon, and against the children of Edom, and against Baethaeor, and against the king of Suba, and against the Philistines: whithersoever he turned, he was victorious.
And he wrought valiantly, and smote Amalec, and rescued Israel out of the hand of them that trampled on him.
And the sons of Saul were Jonathan, and Jessiu, and Melchisa: and these were the names of his two daughters, the name of the first-born Merob, and the name of the second Melchol.
And the name of his wife was Achinoom, the daughter of Achimaa: and the name of his captain of the host was Abenner, the son of Ner, son of a kinsman of Saul.
And Kis was the father of Saul, and Ner, the father of Abenezer, was son of Jamin, son of Abiel.
And the war was vehement against the Philistines all the days of Saul; and when Saul saw any mighty man, and any valiant man, then he took them to himself.
But Job answered and said,
I have heard many such things: poor comforters are ye all.
What! is there any reason in vain words? or what will hinder thee from answering?
I also will speak as ye do: if indeed your soul were in my soul's stead,
then would I insult you with words, and I would shake my head at you.
And would there were strength in my mouth, and I would not spare the movement of my lips.
For if I should speak, I shall not feel the pain of my wound: and if I should be silent, how shall I be wounded the less?
My falsehood has become a testimony, and has risen up against me: it has confronted me to my face.
In his anger he has cast me down; he has gnashed his teeth upon me: the weapons of his robbers have fallen upon me.
He has attacked me with the keen glances of his eyes; with his sharp spear he has smitten me down upon my knees; and they have run upon me with one accord.
For the Lord has delivered me into the hands of unrighteous men, and thrown me upon the ungodly.
When I was at peace he distracted me: he took me by the hair of the head, and plucked it out: he set me up as a mark.
They surrounded me with spears, aiming at my reins: without sparing me they poured out my gall upon the ground.
They overthrew me with fall upon fall: they ran upon me in their might.
They sewed sackcloth upon my skin, and my strength has been spent on the ground.
My belly has been parched with wailing, and darkness is on my eyelids.
Yet there was no injustice in my hands, and my prayer is pure.
Earth, cover not over the blood of my flesh, and let my cry have no place.
And now, behold, my witness is in heaven, and my advocate is on high.
Let my supplication come to the Lord, and let mine eye weep before him.
Oh that a man might plead before the Lord, even as the son of man with his neighbor!
The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me; he has sent me to preach glad tidings to the poor, to heal the broken in heart, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and recovery of sight to the blind;
to declare the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of recompence; to comfort all that mourn;
that there should be given to them that mourn in Sion glory instead of ashes, the oil of joy to the mourners, the garment of glory for the spirit of heaviness: and they shall be called generations of righteousness, the planting of the Lord for glory.
And they shall build the old waste places, they shall raise up those that were before made desolate, and shall renew the desert cities, even those that had been desolate for many generations.
And strangers shall come and feed thy flocks, and aliens shall be thy ploughmen and vine-dressers.
But ye shall be called priests of the Lord, the ministers of God: ye shall eat the strength of nations, and shall be admired because of their wealth.
Thus shall they inherit the land a second time, and everlasting joy shall be upon their head.
For I am the Lord who love righteousness, and hate robberies of injustice; and I will give their labour to the just, and will make an everlasting covenant with them.
And their seed shall be known among the Gentiles, and their offspring in the midst of peoples: every one that sees them shall take notice of them, that they are a seed blessed of God;
And as the earth putting forth her flowers, and as a garden its seed; so shall the Lord, even the Lord, cause righteousness to spring forth, and exultation before all nations.
And the land which I gave to Abraam and Isaac, I have given it to thee; and it shall come to pass that I will give this land also to thy seed after thee.
And God went up from him from the place where he spoke with him.
And Jacob set up a pillar in the place where God spoke with him, a pillar of stone; and offered a libation upon it, and poured oil upon it.
And it came to pass in her hard labour, that the midwife said to her, Be of good courage, for thou shalt also have this son.
And it came to pass in her giving up the ghost (for she was dying), that she called his name, The son of my pain; but his father called his name Benjamin.
So Rachel died, and was buried in the way of the course of Ephratha, this is Bethleem.
And Jacob set up a pillar on her tomb; this is the pillar on the tomb of Rachel, until this day.
And it came to pass when Israel dwelt in that land, that Ruben went and lay with Balla, the concubine of his father Jacob; and Israel heard, and the thing appeared grievous before him.
And these are the generations of Aaron and Moses, in the day in which the Lord spoke to Moses in mount Sina.
And these are the names of the sons of Aaron; Nadab the first-born; and Abiud, Eleazar and Ithamar.
These are the names of the sons of Aaron, the anointed priests whom they consecrated to the priesthood.
And Nadab and Abiud died before the Lord, when they offered strange fire before the Lord, in the wilderness of Sina; and they had no children; and Eleazar and Ithamar ministered in the priests' office with Aaron their father.
And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying,
Take the tribe of Levi, and thou shalt set them before Aaron the priest, and they shall minister to him,
and shall keep his charges, and the charges of the children of Israel, before the tabernacle of witness, to do the works of the tabernacle.
And they shall keep all the furniture of the tabernacle of witness, and the charges of the children of Israel as to all the works of the tabernacle.
And thou shalt give the Levites to Aaron, and to his sons the priests; they are given for a gift to me of the children of Israel.
And thou shalt appoint Aaron and his sons over the tabernacle of witness; and they shall keep their charge of priesthood, and all things belonging to the altar, and within the veil; and the stranger that touches them shall die.
And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying,
Hast thou not seen him? and hast thou not wondered at the things said of him? Dost thou not fear because preparation has been made by me? for who is there that resists me?
Or who will resist me, and abide, since the whole world under heaven is mine?
Who will open the face of his garment? and who can enter within the fold of his breastplate?
Who will open the doors of his face? terror is round about his teeth.
His inwards are as brazen plates, and the texture of his skin as a smyrite stone.
One part cleaves fast to another, and the air cannot come between them.
At his sneezing a light shines, and his eyes are as the appearance of the morning star.
Out of his mouth proceed as it were burning lamps, and as it were hearths of fire are cast abroad.
Out of his nostrils proceeds smoke of a furnace burning with fire of coals.
His breath is as live coals, and a flame goes out of his mouth.
And power is lodged in his neck, before him destruction runs.
The flesh also of his body is joined together: if one pours violence upon him, he shall not be moved.
His heart is firm as a stone, and it stands like an unyielding anvil.
And when he turns, he is a terror to the four-footed wild beasts which leap upon the earth.
If spears should come against him, men will effect nothing, either with the spear or the breast-plate.
For he considers iron as chaff, and brass as rotten wood.
The bow of brass shall not would him, he deems a slinger as grass.
Mauls are counted as stubble; and he laughs to scorn the waving of the firebrand.
His lair is formed of sharp points; and all the gold of the sea under him is an immense quantity of clay.
He makes the deep boil like a brazen caldron; and he regards the sea as a pot of ointment,
and the lowest part of the deep as a captive: he reckons the deep as his range.
There is nothing upon the earth like to him, formed to be sported with by my angels.
He beholds every high thing: and he is king of all that are in the waters.
Clap your hands, all ye nations; shout to God with a voice of exultation.
For the Lord most high is terrible; he is a great king over all the earth.
He has subdued the peoples under us, and the nations under our feet.
He has chosen out his inheritance for us, the beauty of Jacob which he loved. Pause.
God is gone up with a shout, the Lord with a sound of a trumpet.
Sing praises to our God, sing praises: sing praises to our King, sing praises.
For God is king of all the earth: sing praises with understanding.
God reigns over the nations: God sits upon the throne of his holiness.
The rulers of the people are assembled with the God of Abraam: for God's mighty ones of the earth have been greatly exalted.
Bless the Lord, O my soul. O Lord my God, thou art very great; thou hast clothed thyself with praise and honour:
who dost robe thyself with light as with a garment; spreading out the heaven as a curtain.
Who covers his chambers with waters; who makes the clouds his chariot; who walks on the wings of the wind.
Who makes his angels spirits, and his ministers a flaming fire.
Who establishes the earth on her sure foundation: it shall not be moved for ever.
The deep, as it were a garment, is his covering: the waters shall stand on the hills.
At thy rebuke they shall flee; at the voice of thy thunder they shall be alarmed.
They go up to the mountains, and down to the plains, to the place which thou hast founded for them.
Thou hast set a bound which they shall not pass, neither shall they turn again to cover the earth.
He sends forth his fountains among the valleys: the waters shall run between the mountains.
They shall give drink to all the wild beasts of the field: the wild asses shall take of them to quench their thirst.
By them shall the birds of the sky lodge: they shall utter a voice out of the midst of the rocks.
He waters the mountains from his chambers: the earth shall be satisfied with the fruit of thy works.
He makes grass to grow for the cattle, and green herb for the service of men, to bring bread out of the earth;
and wine makes glad the heart of man, to make his face cheerful with oil: and bread strengthens man's heart.
The trees of the plain shall be full of sap; even the cedars of Libanus which he has planted.
There the sparrows will build their nests; and the house of the heron takes the lead among them.
The high mountains are a refuge for the stags, and the rock for the rabbits.
He appointed the moon for seasons: the sun knows his going down.
Thou didst make darkness, and it was night; in it all the wild beasts of the forest will be abroad:
even young lions roaring for prey, and to seek meat for themselves from God.
The sun arises, and they shall be gathered together, and shall lie down in their dens.
Man shall go forth to his work, and to his labour till evening.
How great are thy works, O Lord! in wisdom hast thou wrought them all: the earth is filled with thy creation.
So is this great and wide sea: there are things creeping innumerable, small animals and great.
There go the ships; and this dragon whom thou hast made to play in it.
All wait upon thee, to give them their food in due season.
When thou hast given it them, they will gather it; and when thou hast opened thine hand, they shall all be filled with good.
But when thou hast turned away thy face, they shall be troubled: thou wilt take away their breath, and they shall fail, and return to their dust.
Thou shalt send forth thy Spirit, and they shall be created; and thou shalt renew the face of the earth.
Let the glory of the Lord be for ever: the Lord shall rejoice in his works;
who looks upon the earth, and makes it tremble; who touches the mountains, and they smoke.
I will sing to the Lord while I live; I will sing praise to my God while I exist.
Let my meditation be sweet to him: and I will rejoice in the Lord.
Let the sinners fail from off the earth, and transgressors, so that they shall be no more. Bless the Lord, O my soul.
Now it came to pass in the fourteenth year of the reign of Ezekias, that Sennacherim, king of the Assyrians, came up against the strong cities of Judea, and took them.
And the king of the Assyrians sent Rabsaces out of Laches to Jerusalem to king Ezekias with a large force: and he stood by the conduit of the upper pool in the way of the fuller's field.
And there went forth to him Heliakim the steward, the son of Chelcias, and Somnas the scribe, and Joach the son of Asaph, the recorder.
And Rabsaces said to them, Say to Ezekias, Thus says the great king, the king of the Assyrians, Why art thou secure?
Is war carried on with counsel and mere words of the lips? and now on whom dost thou trust, that thou rebellest against me?
Behold, thou trustest on this bruised staff of reed, on Egypt: as soon as a man leans upon it, it shall go into his hand, and pierce it: so is Pharao king of Egypt and all that trust in him.
But if ye say, We trust in the Lord our God;
yet now make an agreement with my lord the king of the Assyrians, and I will give you two thousand horses, if ye shall be able to set riders upon them.
And how can ye then turn to the face of the satraps? They that trust on the Egyptians for horse and rider, are our servants.
And now, Have we come up against this land to fight against it without the Lord? The Lord said to me, Go up against this land, and destroy it.
Then Eliakim and Somnas and Joach said to him, Speak to thy servants in the Syrian tongue; for we understand it: and speak not to us in the Jewish tongue: and wherefore speakest thou in the ears of the men on the wall?
And Rabsaces said to them, Has my lord sent me to your lord or to you, to speak these words? has he not sent me to the men that sit on the wall, that they may eat dung, and drink their water together with you?
And Rabsaces stood and cried with a loud voice in the Jewish language, and said, Hear ye the words of the great king, the king of the Assyrians:
thus says the king, Let not Ezekias deceive you with words: he will not be able to deliver you.
And let not Ezekias say to you, That God will deliver you, and this city will not at all be delivered into the hand of the king of the Assyrians.
Hearken not to Ezekias: thus says the king of the Assyrians, If ye wish to be blessed, come out to me: and ye shall eat every one of his vine and his fig-trees, and ye shall drink water out of your own cisterns:
until I come and take you to a land, like your own land, a land of corn and wine, and bread, and vineyards.
Let not Ezekias deceive you, saying, God will deliver you. Have the gods of the nations delivered each one his own land out of the hand of the king of the Assyrians?
Where is the god of Emath, and Arphath? and where is the god of Eppharuaim? have they been able to deliver Samaria out of my hand?
Which is the god of all these nations, that has delivered his land out of my hand, that God should deliver Jerusalem out of my hand?
And they were silent, and none answered him a word; because the king had commanded that none should answer.
And Heliakim the son of Chelcias, the steward, and Somnas the military scribe, and Joach the son of Asaph, the recorder, came in to Ezekias, having their garments rent, and they reported to him the words of Rabsaces.
And Joshua the son of Naue sent out of Sattin two young men to spy the land, saying, Go up and view the land and Jericho: and the two young men went and entered into Jericho; and they entered into the house of a harlot, whose name was Raab, and lodged there.
An it was reported to the king of Jericho, saying, Men of the sons of Israel have come in hither to spy the land.
And the king of Jericho sent and spoke to Raab, saying, Bring out the men that entered into thine house this night; for they are come to spy out the land.
And the woman took the two men and hid them; and she spoke to the messengers, saying, The men came in to me,
but when the gate was shut in the evening, the men went out; I know not whither they are gone: follow after them, if ye may overtake them.
But she had brought them up upon the house, and hid them in the flax-stalks that were spread by her on the house.
And the men followed after them in the way to Jordan to the fords; and the gate was shut.
And it came to pass when the men who pursued after them were gone forth, and before the spies had lain down to sleep, that she came up to them on the top of the house;
and she said to them, I know that the Lord has given you the land; for the fear of you has fallen upon us.
For we have heard that the Lord God dried up the Red Sea before you, when ye came out of the land of Egypt, and all that he did to the two kings of the Amorites, who were beyond Jordan, to Seon and Og, whom ye utterly destroyed.
And when we heard it we were amazed in our heart, and there was no longer any spirit in any of us because of you, for the Lord your god is God in heaven above, and on the earth beneath.
And now swear to me by the Lord God; since I deal mercifully with you, so do ye also deal mercifully with the house of my father:
and save alive the house of my father, my mother, and my brethren, and all my house, and all that they have, and ye shall rescue my soul from death.
And the men said to her, Our life for yours even to death: and she said, When the Lord shall have delivered the city to you, ye shall deal mercifully and truly with me.
And she let them down by the window;
and she said to them, Depart into the hill-country, lest the pursuers meet you, and ye shall be hidden there three days until your pursuers return from after you, and afterwards ye shall depart on your way.
And the men said to her, We are clear of this thy oath.
Behold, we shall enter into a part of the city, and thou shalt set a sign; thou shalt bind this scarlet cord in the window, by which thou hast let us down, and thou shalt bring in to thyself, into thy house, thy father, and thy mother, and thy brethren, and all the family of thy father.
And it shall come to pass that whosoever shall go outside the door of thy house, his guilt shall be upon him, and we shall be quit of this thine oath; and we will be responsible for all that shall be found with thee in thy house.
And there was a famine in the days of David three years, year after year; and David sought the face of the Lord. And the Lord said, There is guilt upon Saul and his house because of his bloody murder, whereby he slew the Gabaonites.
And King David called the Gabaonites, and said to them; (now the Gabaonites are not the children of Israel, but are of the remnant of the Amorite, and the children of Israel had sworn to them: but Saul sought to smite them in his zeal for the children of Israel and Juda.)
And David said to the Gabaonites, What shall I do to you? and wherewithal shall I make atonement, that ye may bless the inheritance of the Lord?
And the Gabaonites said to him, We have no question about silver or gold with Saul and with his house; and there is no man for us to put to death in Israel.
And he said, What say ye? speak, and I will do it for you. And they said to the king, The man who would have made an end of us, and persecuted us, who plotted against us to destroy us, let us utterly destroy him, so that he shall have no standing in all the coasts of Israel.
Let one give us seven men of his sons, and let us hang them up in the sun to the Lord in Gabaon of Saul, as chosen out for the Lord. And the king said, I will give them.
But the king spared Memphibosthe son of Jonathan the son of Saul, because of the oath of the Lord that was between them, even between David and Jonathan the son of Saul.
And the king took the two sons of Respha the daughter of Aia, whom she bore to Saul, Hermonoi and Memphibosthe, and the five sons of Michol daughter of Saul, whom she bore to Esdriel son of Berzelli the Moulathite.
And he gave them into the hand of the Gabaonites, and they hanged them up to the sun in the mountain before the lord: and they fell, even the seven together: moreover they were put to death in the days of harvest at the commencement, in the beginning of barley-harvest.
And Respha the daughter of Aia took sackcloth, and fixed it for herself on the rock in the beginning of barley harvest, until water dropped upon them out of heaven: and she did not suffer the birds of the air to rest upon them by day, nor the beasts of the field by night.
And it was told David what Respha the daughter of Aia the concubine of Saul had done, and they were faint, and Dan, the son of Joa of the offspring of the giants overtook them.
And David went and took the bones of Saul, and the bones of Jonathan his son, from the men of the sons of Jabis Galaad, who stole them from the street of Baethsan; for the Philistines set them there in the day in which the Philistines smote Saul in Gelbue.
And he carried up thence the bones of Saul and the bones of Jonathan his son, and gathered the bones of them that had been hanged.
And they buried the bones of Saul and the bones of Jonathan his son, and the bones of them that had been hanged, in the land of Benjamin in the hill, in the sepulchre of Cis his father; and they did all things that the king commanded: and after this God hearkened to the prayers of the land.
And there was yet war between the Philistines and Israel: and David went down and his servants with him, and they fought with the Philistines, and David went.
And Jesbi, who was of the progeny of Rapha, and the head of whose spear was three hundred shekels of brass in weight, who also was girt with a club, even he thought to smite David.
And Abessa the son of Saruia helped him and smote the Philistine, and slew him. Then the men of David swore, saying, Thou shalt not any longer go out with us to battle, and thou shalt not quench the lamp of Israel.
And after this there was a battle again with the Philistines in Geth: then Sebocha the Astatothite slew Seph of the progeny of Rapha.
And there was a battle in Rom with the Philistines; and Eleanan son of Ariorgim the Bethleemite slew Goliath the Gittite; and the staff of his spear was as a weaver's beam.
And there was yet a battle in Geth: and there was a man of stature, and the fingers of his hands and the toes of his feet were six on each, four and twenty in number: and he also was born to Rapha.
And he defied Israel, and Jonathan son of Semei brother of David, smote him.
These four were born descendants of the giants in Geth, the family of Rapha; and they fell by the hand of David, and by the hand of his servants.
Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy great mercy; and according to the multitude of thy compassions blot out my transgression.
Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin.
For I am conscious of mine iniquity; and my sin is continually before me.
Against thee only have I sinned, and done evil before thee: that thou mightest be justified in thy sayings, and mightest overcome when thou art judged.
For, behold, I was conceived in iniquities, and in sins did my mother conceive me.
For, behold, thou lovest truth: thou hast manifested to me the secret and hidden things of thy wisdom.
Thou shalt sprinkle me with hyssop, and I shall be purified: thou shalt wash me, and I shall be made whiter than snow.
Thou shalt cause me to hear gladness and joy: the afflicted bones shall rejoice.
Turn away thy face from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities.
Create in me a clean heart, O God; and renew a right spirit in my inward parts.
Cast me not away from thy presence; and remove not thy holy Spirit from me.
Restore to me the joy of thy salvation: establish me with thy directing Spirit.
Then will I teach transgressors thy ways; and ungodly men shall turn to thee.
Deliver me from blood-guiltiness, O God, the God of my salvation: and my tongue shall joyfully declare thy righteousness.
O Lord, thou shalt open my lips; and my mouth shall declare thy praise.
For if thou desiredst sacrifice, I would have given it: thou wilt not take pleasure in whole-burnt-offerings.
Sacrifice to God is a broken spirit: a broken and humbled heart God will not despise.
Do good, O Lord, to Sion in thy good pleasure; and let the walls of Jerusalem be built.
Then shalt thou be pleased with a sacrifice of righteousness, offering, and whole-burnt-sacrifices: then shall they offer calves upon thine altar.
In the year when Tanathan came to Azotus, when he was sent by Arna king of the Assyrians, and warred against Azotus, and took it;
then the Lord spoke to Esaias the son of Amos, saying, Go and take the sackcloth off thy loins, and loose thy sandals from off thy feet, and do thus, going naked and barefoot.
And the Lord said, As my servant Esaias has walked naked and barefoot three years, there shall be three years for signs and wonders to the Egyptians and Ethiopians;
for thus shall the king of the Assyrians lead the captivity of Egypt and the Ethiopians, young men and old, naked and barefoot, having the shame of Egypt exposed.
And the Egyptians being defeated shall be ashamed of the Ethiopians, in whom they had trusted; for they were their glory.
And they that dwell in this island shall say in that day, Behold, we trusted to flee to them for help, who could not save themselves from the king of the Assyrians: and how shall we be saved?
I am well pleased, because the Lord will hearken to the voice of my supplication.
Because he has inclined his ear to me, therefore will I call upon him while I live.
The pangs of death compassed me; the dangers of hell found me: I found affliction and sorrow.
Then I called on the name of the Lord: O Lord, deliver my soul.
The Lord is merciful and righteous; yea, our God has pity.
The Lord preserves the simple: I was brought low, and he delivered me.
Return to thy rest, O my soul; for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee.
For he has delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my feet from falling.
I shall be well-pleasing before the Lord in the land of the living.
I believed, wherefore I have spoken: but I was greatly afflicted.
And these are they of the children of Israel that received their inheritance in the land of Chanaan, to whom Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the son of Naue, and the heads of the families of the tribes of the children of Israel, gave inheritance.
They inherited according to their lots, as the Lord commanded by the hand of Joshua to the nine tribes and the half tribe, on the other side of Jordan.
But to the Levites he gave no inheritance among them.
For the sons of Joseph were two tribes, Manasse and Ephraim; and there was none inheritance in the land given to the Levites, only cities to dwell in, and their suburbs separated for the cattle, and their cattle.
As the Lord commanded Moses, so did the children of Israel; and they divided the land.
And the children of Juda came to Joshua in Galgal, and Chaleb the son of Jephone the Kenezite said to him, Thou knowest the word that the Lord spoke to Moses the man of God concerning me and thee in Cades Barne.
For I was forty years old when Moses the servant of God sent me out of Cades Barne to spy out the land; and I returned him an answer according to his mind.
My brethren that went up with me turned away the heart of the people, but I applied my self to follow the Lord my God.
And Moses sware on that day, saying, The land on which thou art gone up, it shall be thy inheritance and thy children's for ever, because thou hast applied thyself to follow the Lord our God.
And now the Lord has kept me alive as he said: this is the forty-fifth year since the Lord spoke that word to Moses; and Israel journeyed in the wilderness; and now, behold, I am this day eighty-five years old.
I am still strong this day, as when the Lord sent me: just so strong am I now to go out and to come in for war.
And now I ask of thee this mountain, as the Lord said in that day; for thou heardest this word on that day; and now the Enakim are there, cities great and strong: if then the Lord should be with me, I will utterly destroy them, as the Lord said to me.
And Joshua blessed him, and gave Chebron to Chaleb the son of Jephone the son of Kenez for an inheritance.
Therefore Chebron became the inheritance of Chaleb the son of Jephone the Kenezite until this day, because he followed the commandment of the Lord God of Israel.
And the name of Chebron before was the city Argob, it is the metropolis of the Enakim: and the land rested from war.
Thy steps are beautiful in shoes, O daughter of the prince: the joints of thy thighs are like chains, the work of the craftsman.
Thy navel is as a turned bowl, not wanting liquor; thy belly is as a heap of wheat set about with lilies.
Thy two breasts are as two twin fawns.
Thy neck is as an ivory tower; thine eyes are as pools in Esebon, by the gates of the daughter of many: thy nose is as the tower of Libanus, looking toward Damascus.
Thy head upon thee is as Carmel, and the curls of thy hair like scarlet; the king is bound in the galleries.
How beautiful art thou, and how sweet art thou, my love!
This is thy greatness in thy delights: thou wast made like a palm tree, and thy breasts to cluster.
I said, I will go up to the palm tree, I will take hold of its high boughs: and now shall thy breasts be as clusters of the vine, and the smell of thy nose of apples;
and thy throat as good wine, going well with my kinsman, suiting my lips and teeth.
I am my kinsman's, and his desire is toward me.
Come, my kinsman, let us go forth into the field; let us lodge in the villages.
Let us go early into the vineyards; let us see if the vine has flowered, if the blossoms have appeared, if the pomegranates have blossomed; there will I give thee my breasts.
The mandrakes have given a smell, and at our doors are all kinds of choice fruits, new and old. O my kinsman, I have kept them for thee.
My heart is established in the Lord, my horn is exalted in my God; my mouth is enlarged over my enemies, I have rejoiced in thy salvation.
For there is none holy as the Lord, and there is none righteous as our God; there is none holy besides thee.
Boast not, and utter not high things; let not high-sounding words come out of your mouth, for the Lord is a God of knowledge, and God prepares his own designs.
The bow of the mighty has waxed feeble, and the weak have girded themselves with strength.
They that were full of bread are brought low; and the hungry have forsaken the land; for the barren has born seven, and she that abounded in children has waxed feeble.
The Lord kills and makes alive; he brings down to the grave, and brings up.
The Lord makes poor, and makes rich; he brings low, and lifts up.
He lifts up the poor from the earth, and raises the needy from the dunghill; to seat him with the princes of the people, and causing them to inherit the throne of glory:
granting his petition to him that prays; and he blesses the years of the righteous, for by strength cannot man prevail.
The Lord will weaken his adversary; the Lord is holy. Let not the wise man boast in his wisdom, nor let the mighty man boast in his strength, and let not the rich man boast in his wealth; but let him that boasts boast in this, to understand and know the Lord, and to execute judgment and justice in the midst of the earth. The Lord has gone up to the heavens, and has thundered: he will judge the extremities of the earth, and he gives strength to our kings, and will exalt the horn of his Christ. And she left him there before the Lord,
and departed to Armathaim: and the child ministered in the presence of the Lord before Heli the priest.
And the sons of Heli the priest were evil sons, not knowing the Lord.
And the priest's claim from every one of the people that sacrificed was this: the servant of the priest came when the flesh was in seething, and a flesh-hook of three teeth was in his hand.
And he struck it into the great caldron, or into the brazen vessel, or into the pot, and whatever came up with the flesh-hook, the priest took for himself: so they did to all Israel that came to sacrifice to the Lord in Selom.
And before the fat was burnt for a sweet savour, the servant of the priest would come, and say to the man that sacrificed, Give flesh to roast for the priest, and I will by no means take of thee sodden flesh out of the caldron.
And if the man that sacrificed said, First let the fat be burned, as it is fit, and take for thyself of all things which thy soul desires: then he would say, Nay, for thou shalt give it me now; and if not I will take it by force.
So the sin of the young men was very great before the Lord, for they set at nought the offering of the Lord.
And Samuel ministered before the Lord, a child girt with a linen ephod.
And his mother made him a little doublet, and brought it to him from year to year, in her going up in company with her husband to offer the yearly sacrifice.
And Heli blessed Helcana and his wife, saying The Lord recompense to thee seed of this woman, in return for the loan which thou hast lent to the Lord: and the man returned to his place.
And the Lord visited Anna, and she bore yet three sons, and two daughters. And the child Samuel grew before the Lord.
And Heli was very old, and he heard what his sons did to the children of Israel.
And he said to them, Why do ye according to this thing, which I hear from the mouth of all the people of the Lord?
Nay my sons, for the report which I hear is not good; do not so, for the reports which I hear are not good, so that the people do not serve God.
If a man should at all sin against another, then shall they pray for him to the Lord; but if a man sin against the Lord, who shall intreat for him? But they hearkened not to the voice of their father, because the Lord would by all means destroy them.
And the child Samuel advanced, and was in favour with God and with men.
And a man of God came to Heli, and said, Thus says the Lord, I plainly revealed myself to the house of thy father, when they were servants in Egypt to the house of Pharao.
And I chose the house of thy father out of all the tribes of Israel to minister to me in the priest's office, to go up to my altar, and to burn incense, and to wear an ephod. And I gave to the house of thy father all the offerings by fire of the children of Israel for food.
And wherefore hast thou looked upon my incense-offering and my meat-offering with a shameless eye, and hast honoured thy sons above me, so that they should bless themselves with the first-fruits of every sacrifice of Israel before me?
Therefore thus says the Lord God of Israel, I said, Thy house and the house of thy father shall pass before me for ever: but now the Lord says, That be far from me; for I will only honour them that honour me, and he that sets me at nought shall be despised.
Behold, the days come when I will destroy thy seed and the seed of thy father's house.
And thou shalt not have an old man in my house for ever.
And if I do not destroy a man of thine from my altar, it shall be that his eyes may fail and his soul may perish; and every one that remains in thy house shall fall by the sword of men.
And this which shall come upon thy two sons Ophni and Phinees shall be a sign to thee; in one day they shall both die.
And I will raise up to myself a faithful priest, who shall do all that is in my heart and in my soul; and I will build him a sure house, and he shall walk before my Christ for ever.
And it shall come to pass that he that survives in thy house, shall come to do obeisance before him for a little piece of silver, saying, Put me into one of thy priest's offices to eat bread.
And these are the ordinances which thou shalt set before them.
If thou buy a Hebrew servant, six years shall he serve thee, and in the seventh year he shall go forth free for nothing.
If he should have come in alone, he shall also go forth alone; and if his wife should have gone in together with him, his wife also shall go out.
Moreover, if his master give him a wife, and she have born him sons or daughters, the wife and the children shall be his master's; and he shall go forth alone.
And if the servant should answer and say, I love my master and wife and children, I will not go away free;
his master shall bring him to the judgment-seat of God, and then shall he bring him to the door, to the door-post, and his master shall bore his ear through with an awl, and he shall serve him for ever.
And if any one sell his daughter as a domestic, she shall not depart as the maid-servants depart.
If she be not pleasing to her master, after she has betrothed herself to him, he shall let her go free; but he is not at liberty to sell her to a foreign nation, because he has trifled with her.
And if he should have betrothed her to his son, he shall do to her according to the right of daughters.
And if he take another to himself, he shall not deprive her of necessaries and her apparel, and her companionship with him.
And if he will not do these three things to her, she shall go out free without money.
And if any man smite another and he die, let him be certainly put to death.
But as for him that did it not willingly, but God delivered him into his hands, I will give thee a place whither the slayer may flee.
And if any one lie in wait for his neighbour to slay him by craft, and he go for refuge, thou shalt take him from my altar to put him to death.
Whoever smites his father or his mother, let him be certainly put to death.
He that reviles his father or his mother shall surely die.
Whosoever shall steal one of the children of Israel, and prevail over him and sell him, and he be found with him, let him certainly die.
And if two men revile each other and smite the one the other with a stone or his fist, and he die not, but be laid upon his bed;
if the man arise and walk abroad on his staff, he that smote him shall be clear; only he shall pay for his loss of time, and for his healing.
And if a man smite his man-servant or his maid-servant, with a rod, and the party die under his hands, he shall be surely punished.
But if the servant continue to live a day or two, let not the master be punished; for he is his money.
And if two men strive and smite a woman with child, and her child be born imperfectly formed, he shall be forced to pay a penalty: as the woman's husband may lay upon him, he shall pay with a valuation.
But if it be perfectly formed, he shall give life for life,
eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot,
burning for burning, wound for wound, stripe for stripe.
And if one smite the eye of his man-servant, or the eye of his maid-servant, and put it out, he shall let them go free for their eye's sake.
And if he should smite out the tooth of his man-servant, or the tooth of his maid-servant, he shall send them away free for their tooth's sake.
And if a bull gore a man or woman and they die, the bull shall be stoned with stones, and his flesh shall not be eaten; but the owner of the bull shall be clear.
But if the bull should have been given to goring in former time, and men should have told his owner, and he have not removed him, but he should have slain a man or woman, the bull shall be stoned, and his owner shall die also.
And if a ransom should be imposed on him, he shall pay for the ransom of his soul as much as they shall lay upon him.
And if the bull gore a son or daughter, let them do to him according to this ordinance.
And if the bull gore a man-servant or maid-servant, he shall pay to their master thirty silver didrachms, and the bull shall be stoned.
And if any one open a pit or dig a cavity in stone, and cover it not, and an ox or an ass fall in there,
the owner of the pit shall make compensation; he shall give money to their owner, and the dead shall be his own.
And if any man's bull gore the bull of his neighbour, and it die, they shall sell the living bull and divide the money, and they shall divide the dead bull.
But if the bull be known to have been given to goring in time past, and they have testified to his owner, and he have not removed him, he shall repay bull for bull, but the dead shall be his own.
O Lord my God, in thee have I trusted: save me from all them that persecute me, and deliver me.
Lest at any time the enemy seize my soul as a lion, while there is none to ransom, nor to save.
O Lord my God, if I have done this; (if there is unrighteousness in my hands;)
if I have requited with evil those who requited me with good; may I then perish empty by means of my enemies.
Let the enemy persecute my soul, an take it; and let him trample my life on the ground, and lay my glory in the dust. Pause.
Arise, O Lord, in thy wrath; be exalted in the utmost boundaries of mine enemies: awake, O Lord my God, according to the decree which thou didst command.
And the congregation of the nations shall compass thee: and for this cause do thou return on high.
The Lord shall judge the nations: judge me, O Lord, according to my righteousness, and according to my innocence that is in me.
Oh let the wickedness of sinners come to an end; and then thou shalt direct the righteous, O God that searchest the hearts and reins.
My help is righteous, coming from God who saves the upright in heart.
God is a righteous judge, and strong, and patient, not inflicting vengeance every day.
If ye will not repent, he will furbish his sword; he has bent his bow, and made it ready.
And on it he has fitted the instruments of death; he has completed his arrows for the raging ones.
Behold, he has travailed with unrighteousness, he has conceived trouble, and brought forth iniquity.
He has opened a pit, and dug it up, and he shall fall into the ditch which he has made.
His trouble shall return on his own head, and his unrighteousness shall come down on his own crown.
I will give thanks to the Lord according to his righteousness; I will sing to the name of the Lord most high.
O Lord, attend to my prayer: hearken to my supplication in thy truth; hear me in thy righteousness.
And enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no man living be justified.
For the enemy has persecuted my soul; he has brought my life down to the ground; he has made me to dwell in a dark place, as those that have been long dead.
Therefore my spirit was grieved in me; my heart was troubled within me.
I remembered the days of old; and I meditated on all thy doings: yea, I meditated on the works of thine hands.
I spread forth my hands to thee; my soul thirsts for thee, as a dry land. Pause.
Hear me speedily, O Lord; my spirit has failed; turn not away thy face from me, else I shall be like to them that go down to the pit.
Cause me to hear thy mercy in the morning; for I have hoped in thee; make known to me, O Lord, the way wherein I should walk; for I have lifted up my soul to thee.
Deliver me from mine enemies, O Lord; for I have fled to thee for refuge.
Teach me to do thy will; for thou art my God; thy good Spirit shall guide me in the straight way.
Thou shalt quicken me, O Lord, for thy name's sake; in thy righteousness thou shalt bring my soul out of affliction.
And in thy mercy thou wilt destroy mine enemies, and wilt destroy all those that afflict my soul; for I am thy servant.
And he said in the ears of Ephron before the people of the land, Since thou art on my side, hear me; take the price of the field from me, and I will bury my dead there.
But Ephron answered Abraam, saying,
Nay, my lord, I have heard indeed, the land four hundred silver didrachms, but what can this be between me and thee? nay, do thou bury thy dead.
And Abraam hearkened to Ephron, and Abraam rendered to Ephron the money, which he mentioned in the ears of the sons of Chet, four hundred didrachms of silver approved with merchants.
to Abraam for a possession, before the sons of Chet, and all that entered into the city.
After this Abraam buried Sarrha his wife in the Double Cave of the field, which is opposite Mambre, this is Chebron in the land of Chanaan.
So the field and the cave which was in it were made sure to Abraam for possession of a burying place, by the sons of Chet.
And the Lord said to me, Though Moses and Samuel stood before my face, my soul could not be toward them: dismiss this people, and let them go forth.
And I will punish them with four kinds of death, saith the Lord, the sword to slay, and the dogs to tear, and the wild beasts of the earth, and the birds of the sky to devour and destroy.
And I will deliver them up for distress to all the kingdoms of the earth, because of Manasses son of Ezekias king of Juda, for all that he did in Jerusalem.
Who will spare thee, O Jerusalem? and who will fear for thee? or who will turn back to ask for thy welfare?
Thou hast turned away from me, saith the Lord, thou wilt go back: therefore I will stretch out my hand, and will destroy thee, and will no more spare them.
And I will completely scatter them; in the gates of my people they are bereaved of children: they have destroyed my people because of their iniquities.
Their widows have been multiplied more than the sand of the sea: I have brought young men against the mother, even distress at noon-day: I have suddenly cast upon her trembling and anxiety.
She that bore seven is spent; her soul has fainted under trouble; her sun is gone down while it is yet noon; she is ashamed and disgraced: I will give the remnant of them to the sword before their enemies.
Woe is me, my mother! thou hast born me as some man of strife, and at variance with the whole earth; I have not helped others, nor has any one helped me; my strength has failed among them that curse me.
Be it so, Lord, in their prosperity; surely I stood before thee in the time of their calamities, and in the time of their affliction, for their good against the enemy.
Will iron be known? whereas thy strength is a brazen covering.
Yea, I will give thy treasures for a spoil as a recompence, because of all thy sins and that in all thy borders.
And I will enslave thee to thine enemies round about, in a land which thou hast not known; for a fire has been kindled out of my wrath; it shall burn upon you.
O Lord, remember me, and visit me, and vindicate me before them that persecute me; do not bear long with them; know how I have met with reproach for thy sake, from those who set at nought thy words;
consume them; and thy word shall be to me for the joy and gladness of my heart: for thy name has been called upon me, O Lord Almighty.
I have not sat in the assembly of them as they mocked, but I feared because of thy power: I sat alone, for I was filled with bitterness.
Why do they that grieve me prevail against me? my wound is severe; whence shall I be healed? it is indeed become to me as deceitful water, that has no faithfulness.
Therefore thus saith the Lord, If thou wilt return, then will I restore thee, and thou shalt stand before my face: and if thou wilt bring forth the precious from the worthless, thou shalt be as my mouth: and they shall return to thee; but thou shalt not return to them.
Hear me your father, O children, and do thereafter, that ye may be safe.
For the Lord hath given the father honour over the children, and hath confirmed the authority of the mother over the sons.
Whoso honoureth his father maketh an atonement for his sins:
And he that honoureth his mother is as one that layeth up treasure.
Whoso honoureth his father shall have joy of his own children; and when he maketh his prayer, he shall be heard.
He that honoureth his father shall have a long life; and he that is obedient unto the Lord shall be a comfort to his mother.
He that feareth the Lord will honour his father, and will do service unto his parents, as to his masters.
Honour thy father and mother both in word and deed, that a blessing may come upon thee from them.
For the blessing of the father establisheth the houses of children; but the curse of the mother rooteth out foundations.
Glory not in the dishonour of thy father; for thy father's dishonour is no glory unto thee.
For the glory of a man is from the honour of his father; and a mother in dishonour is a reproach to the children.
My son, help thy father in his age, and grieve him not as long as he liveth.
And if his understanding fail, have patience with him; and despise him not when thou art in thy full strength.
For the relieving of thy father shall not be forgotten: and instead of sins it shall be added to build thee up.
In the day of thine affliction it shall be remembered; thy sins also shall melt away, as the ice in the fair warm weather.
He that forsaketh his father is as a blasphemer; and he that angereth his mother is cursed: of God.
My son, go on with thy business in meekness; so shalt thou be beloved of him that is approved.
The greater thou art, the more humble thyself, and thou shalt find favour before the Lord.
For the power of the Lord is great, and he is honoured of the lowly.
Seek not out things that are too hard for thee, neither search the things that are above thy strength.
But what is commanded thee, think thereupon with reverence, for it is not needful for thee to see with thine eyes the things that are in secret.
Be not curious in unnecessary matters: for more things are shewed unto thee than men understand.
For many are deceived by their own vain opinion; and an evil suspicion hath overthrown their judgment.
A stubborn heart shall fare evil at the last; and he that loveth danger shall perish therein.
An obstinate heart shall be laden with sorrows; and the wicked man shall heap sin upon sin.
In the punishment of the proud there is no remedy; for the plant of wickedness hath taken root in him.
The heart of the prudent will understand a parable; and an attentive ear is the desire of a wise man.
Water will quench a flaming fire; and alms maketh an atonement for sins.
And he that requiteth good turns is mindful of that which may come hereafter; and when he falleth, he shall find a stay.
And if there should be a dispute between men, and they should come forward to judgment, and the judges judge, and justify the righteous, and condemn the wicked:
then it shall come to pass, if the unrighteous should be worthy of stripes, thou shalt lay him down before the judges, and they shall scourge him before them according to his iniquity.
And they shall scourge him with forty stripes in number, they shall not inflict more; for if thou shouldest scourge him with more stripes beyond these stripes, thy brother will be disgraced before thee.
Thou shalt not muzzle the ox that treads out the corn.
And if brethren should live together, and one of them should die, and should not have seed, the wife of the deceased shall not marry out of the family to a man not related: her husband's brother shall go in to her, and shall take her to himself for a wife, and shall dwell with her.
And it shall come to pass that the child which she shall bear, shall be named by the name of the deceased, and his name shall not be blotted out of Israel.
And if the man should not be willing to take his brother's wife, then shall the woman go up to the gate to the elders, and she shall say, My husband's brother will not raise up the name of his brother in Israel, my husband's brother has refused.
And the elders of his city shall call him, and speak to him; and if he stand and say, I will not take her:
then his brother's wife shall come forward before the elders, and shall loose one shoe from off his foot, and shall spit in his face, and shall answer and say, Thus shall they do to the man who will not build his brother's house in Israel.
And his name shall be called in Israel, The house of him that has had his shoe loosed.
And if men should strive together, a man with his brother, and the wife of one of them should advance to rescue her husband out of the hand of him that smites him, and she should stretch forth her hand, and take hold of his private parts;
thou shalt cut off her hand; thine eye shall not spare her.
Thou shalt not have in thy bag divers weights, a great and a small.
Thou shalt not have in thine house divers measures, a great and a small.
Thou shalt have a true and just weight, and a true and just measure, that thou mayest live long upon the land which the Lord thy God gives thee for an inheritance.
For every one that does this is an abomination to the Lord thy God, even every one that does injustice.
Remember what things Amalec did to thee by the way, when thou wentest forth out of the land of Egypt:
how he withstood thee in the way, and harassed thy rear, even those that were weary behind thee, and thou didst hunger and wast weary; and he did not fear God.
And it shall come to pass whenever the Lord thy God shall have given thee rest from all thine enemies round about thee, in the land which the Lord thy God gives thee to inherit, thou shalt blot out the name of Amalec from under heaven, and shalt not forget to do it.
He that dwells in the help of the Highest, shall sojourn under the shelter of the God of heaven.
He shall say to the Lord, Thou art my helper and my refuge: my God; I will hope in him.
For he shall deliver thee from the snare of the hunters, from every troublesome matter.
He shall overshadow thee with his shoulders, and thou shalt trust under his wings: his truth shall cover thee with a shield.
Thou shalt not be afraid of terror by night; nor of the arrow flying by day;
nor of the evil thing that walks in darkness; nor of calamity, and the evil spirit at noon-day.
A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand; but it shall not come nigh thee.
Only with thine eyes shalt thou observe and see the reward of sinners.
For thou, O Lord, art my hope: thou, my soul, hast made the Most High thy refuge.
No evils shall come upon thee, and no scourge shall draw nigh to thy dwelling.
For he shall give his angels charge concerning thee, to keep thee in all thy ways.
They shall bear thee up on their hands, lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone.
Thou shalt tread on the asp and basilisk: and thou shalt trample on the lion and dragon.
For he has hoped in me, and I will deliver him: I will protect him, because he has known my name.
He shall call upon me, and I will hearken to him: I am with him in affliction; and I will deliver him, and glorify him.
I will satisfy him with length of days, and shew him my salvation.
Sound the trumpet in Sion, make a proclamation in my holy mountain, and let all the inhabitants of the land be confounded: for the day of the Lord is near;
for a day of darkness and gloominess is near, a day of cloud and mist: a numerous and strong people shall be spread upon the mountains as the morning; there has not been from the beginning one like it, and after it there shall not be again even to the years of many generations.
Before them is a consuming fire, and behind them is a flame kindled: the land before them is as a paradise of delight, and behind them a desolate plain: and there shall none of them escape.
Before them the earth shall be confounded, and the sky shall be shaken: the sun and the moon shall be darkened, and the stars shall withdraw their light.
And the Lord shall utter his voice before his host: for his camp is very great: for the execution of his words is mighty: for the day of the Lord is great, very glorious, and who shall be able to resist it?
And the Lord answered and said to his people, Behold, I will send you corn, and wine, and oil, and ye shall be satisfied with them: and I will no longer make you a reproach among the Gentiles.
And I will chase away from you the northern adversary, and will drive him away into a dry land, and I will sink his face in the former sea, and his back parts in the latter sea, and his ill savour shall come up, and his stink come up, because he has wrought great things.
Be of good courage, O land; rejoice and be glad: for the Lord has done great things.
Be of good courage, ye beasts of the plain, for the plains of the wilderness have budded, for the trees have borne their fruit, the fig tree and the vine have yielded their strength.
Rejoice then and be glad, ye children of Sion, in the Lord your God: for he has given you food fully, and he will rain on you the early and the latter rain, as before.
And the floors shall be filled with corn, and the presses shall overflow with wine and oil.
And I will recompense you for the years which the locust, and the caterpillar, and the palmerworm, and the cankerworm have eaten, even my great army, which I sent against you.
And ye shall eat abundantly, and be satisfied, and shall praise the name of the Lord your God for the things which he has wrought wonderfully with you: and my people shall not be ashamed for ever.
And ye shall know that I am in the midst of Israel, and that I am the Lord your God, and that there is none else beside me; and my people shall no more be ashamed for ever.
And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, and your old men shall dream dreams, and your young men shall see visions.
And on my servants and on my handmaids in those days will I pour out of my Spirit.
And I will shew wonders in heaven, and upon the earth, blood, and fire, and vapor of smoke.
The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the great and glorious day of the Lord come.
And it shall come to pass that whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved: for in mount Sion and in Jerusalem shall the saved one be as the Lord has said, and they that have glad tidings preached to them, whom the Lord has called.
And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, and your old men shall dream dreams, and your young men shall see visions.
And on my servants and on my handmaids in those days will I pour out of my Spirit.
And I will shew wonders in heaven, and upon the earth, blood, and fire, and vapor of smoke.
The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the great and glorious day of the Lord come.
And it shall come to pass that whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved: for in mount Sion and in Jerusalem shall the saved one be as the Lord has said, and they that have glad tidings preached to them, whom the Lord has called.
And David numbered the people with him, and set over them captains of thousands and captains of hundreds.
And David sent away the people, the third part under the hand of Joab, and the third part under the hand of Abessa the son of Saruia, the brother of Joab, and the third part under the hand of Ethi the Gittite. And David said to the people, I also will surely go out with you.
And they said, Thou shalt not go out: for if we should indeed flee, they will not care for us; and if half of us should die, they will not mind us; for thou art as ten thousand of us: and now it is well that thou shalt be to us an aid to help us in the city.
And the king said to them, Whatsoever shall seem good in your eyes I will do. And the king stood by the side of the gate, and all the people went out by hundreds and by thousands.
And the king commanded Joab and Abessa and Ethi, saying, Spare for my sake the young man Abessalom. And all the people heard the king charging all the commanders concerning Abessalom.
And all the people went out into the wood against Israel; and the battle was in the wood of Ephraim.
And the people of Israel fell down there before the servants of David, and there was a great slaughter in that day, even twenty thousand men.
And the battle there was scattered over the face of all the land: and the wood consumed more of the people than the sword consumed among the people in that day.
And Abessalom went to meet the servants of David: and Abessalom was mounted on his mule, and the mule came under the thick boughs of a great oak; and his head was entangled in the oak, and he was suspended between heaven and earth; and the mule passed on from under him.
And a man saw it, and reported to Joab, and said, Behold, I saw Abessalom hanging in an oak.
And Joab said to the man who reported it to him, And, behold, thou didst see him: why didst thou not smite him there to the ground? and I would have given thee ten pieces of silver, and a girdle.
And the man said to Joab, Were I even to receive a thousand shekels of silver, I would not lift my hand against the king's son; for in our ears the king charged thee and Abessa and Ethi, saying, Take care of the young man Abessalom for me,
so as to do no harm to his life: and nothing of the matter will be concealed from the king, and thou wilt set thyself against me.
And Joab said, I will begin this; I will not thus remain with thee. And Joab took three darts in his hand, and thrust them into the heart of Abessalom, while he was yet alive in the heart of the oak.
And ten young men that bore Joab's armour compassed Abessalom, and smote him and slew him.
And Joab blew the trumpet, and the people returned from pursuing Israel, for Joab spared the people.
And he took Abessalom, and cast him into a great cavern in the wood, into a deep pit, and set up over him a very great heap of stones: and all Israel fled every man to his tent.
Now Abessalom while yet alive had taken and set up for himself the pillar near which he was taken, and set it up so as to have the pillar in the king's dale; for he said he had no son to keep his name in remembrance: and he called the pillar, Abessalom's hand, until this day.
And Achimaas the son of Sadoc said, Let me run now and carry glad tidings to the king, for the Lord has delivered him from the hand of his enemies.
And Joab said to him, Thou shalt not be a messenger of glad tidings this day; thou shalt bear them another day; but on this day thou shalt bear no tidings, because the king's son is dead.
And Joab said to Chusi, Go, report to the king all that thou hast seen. And Chusi did obeisance to Joab, and went out.
And Achimaas the son of Sadoc said again to Joab, Nay, let me also run after Chusi. And Joab said, Why wouldest thou thus run, my son? attend, thou hast no tidings for profit if thou go.
And he said, Why should I not run? and Joab said to him, Run. And Achimaas ran along the way of Kechar, and outran Chusi.
And David was sitting between the two gates: and the watchman went up on the top of the gate of the wall, and lifted up his eyes, and looked, and behold a man running alone before him.
And the watchman cried out, and reported to the king. And the king said, If he be alone, there are good tidings in his mouth. And the man came and drew near.
And the watchman saw another man running: and the watchman cried at the gate, and said, And look, another man running alone. And the king said, He also brings glad tidings.
And the watchman said, I see the running of the first as the running of Achimaas the son of Sadoc. And the king said, He is a good man, and will come to report glad tidings.
And Achimaas cried out and said to the king, Peace. And he did obeisance to the king with his face to the ground, and said, Blessed be the Lord thy God, who has delivered up the men that lifted up their hands against my lord the king.
And the king said, Is the young man Abessalom safe? and Achimaas said, I saw a great multitude at the time of Joab's sending the king's servant and thy servant, and I knew not what was there.
And the king said, Turn aside, stand still here. And he turned aside, and stood.
And, behold, Chusi came up, and said to the king, Let my lord the king hear glad tidings, for the Lord has avenged thee this day upon all them that rose up against thee.
And the king said to Chusi, Is it well with the young man Abessalom? and Chusi said, Let the enemies of my lord the king, and all whosoever have risen up against him for evil, be as that young man.
And the king was troubled, and went to the chamber over the gate, and wept: and thus he said as he went, My son Abessalom, my son, my son Abessalom; would God I had died for thee, even I had died for thee, Abessalom, my son, my son!
THE WORD THAT CAME TO JEREMIAS from the Lord in the days of Joakim, king of Juda, saying,
Go to the house of the Archabin, and thou shalt bring them to the house of the Lord, into one of the courts, and give them wine to drink.
So I brought forth Jechonias the son of Jeremin the son of Chabasin, and his brethren, and his sons, and all the family of the Archabin;
and I brought them into the house of the Lord, into the chamber of the sons of Joanan, the son of Ananias, the son of Godolias, a man of God, who dwells near the house of the princes that are over the house of Maasaeas the son of Selom, who kept the court.
And I set before them a jar of wine, and cups, and I said, Drink ye wine.
But they said, We will on no account drink wine, for our father Jonadab the son of Rechab commanded us, saying, Ye shall on no account drink wine, neither ye, nor your sons for ever:
nor shall ye at all build houses, nor sow any seed, nor shall ye have a vineyard: for ye shall dwell in tents all your days; that ye may live many days upon the land, in which ye sojourn.
And we hearkened to the voice of Jonadab our father, so as to drink no wine all our days, we, and our wives, and our sons, and our daughters;
and so as to build no houses to dwell in: and we have had no vineyard, nor field, nor seed:
but we have dwelt in tents, and have hearkened, and done according to all that Jonadab our father commanded us.
And it came to pass, when Nabuchodonosor came up against the land, that we said we would come in; and we entered into Jerusalem, for fear of the host of the Chaldeans, and for fear of the host of the Assyrians: and we dwelt there.
And the word of the Lord came to me, saying,
Thus saith the Lord, Go, and say to the men of Juda, and to them that dwell in Jerusalem, Will ye not receive correction to hearken to my words?
The sons of Jonadab the son of Rechab have kept the word which he commanded his children, that they should drink no wine; and they have not drunk it: but I spoke to you early, and ye hearkened not.
And I sent to you my servants the prophets, saying, Turn ye every one from his evil way, and amend your practices, and go not after other gods to serve them, and ye shall dwell upon the land which I gave to you and to your fathers: but ye inclined not your ears, and hearkened not.
But the sons of Jonadab the son of Rechab have kept the command of their father; but this people has not hearkened to me.
Therefore thus saith the Lord; Behold, I will bring upon Juda and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem all the evils which I pronounced against them.
Therefore thus saith the Lord; Since the sons of Jonadab the son of Rechab have hearkened to the command of their father, to do as their father commanded them:
there shall never be wanting a man of the sons of Jonadab the son of Rechab to stand before my face while the earth remains.
Bring to the Lord, ye sons of God, bring to the Lord young rams; bring to the Lord glory and honour.
Bring to the Lord glory, due to his name; worship the lord in his holy court.
The voice of the Lord is upon the waters: the God of glory has thundered: the Lord is upon many waters.
The voice of the Lord is mighty; the voice of the Lord is full of majesty.
There is the voice of the Lord who breaks the cedars; the Lord will break the cedars of Libanus.
And he will beat them small, even Libanus itself, like a calf; and the beloved one is as a young unicorn.
There is a voice of the Lord who divides a flame of fire.
A voice of the Lord who shakes the wilderness; the Lord will shake the wilderness of Cades.
The voice of the Lord strengthens the hinds, and will uncover the thickets: and in his temple every one speaks of his glory.
The Lord will dwell on the waterflood: and the Lord will sit a king for ever.
The Lord will give strength to his people; the Lord will bless his people with peace.
Cry aloud, and spare not; lift up thy voice as with a trumpet, and declare to my people their sins, and to the house of Jacob their iniquities.
They seek me day by day, and desire to know my ways, as a people that had done righteousness, and had not forsaken the judgment of their God: they now ask of me righteous judgment, and desire to draw nigh to God,
saying, Why have we fasted, and thou regardest not? why have we afflicted our souls, and thou didst not know it? Nay, in the days of your fasts ye find your pleasures, and all them that are under your power ye wound.
If ye fast for quarrels and strifes, and smite the lowly with your fists, wherefore do ye fast to me as ye do this day, so that your voice may be heard in crying?
I have not chosen this fast, nor such a day for a man to afflict his soul; neither though thou shouldest bend down thy neck as a ring, and spread under thee sackcloth and ashes, neither thus shall ye call a fast acceptable.
I have not chosen such a fast, saith the Lord; but do thou loose every burden of iniquity, do thou untie the knots of hard bargains, set the bruised free, and cancel every unjust account.
Break thy bread to the hungry, and lead the unsheltered poor to thy house: if thou seest one naked, clothe him, and thou shalt not disregard the relations of thine own seed.
Then shall thy light break forth as the morning, and thy health shall speedily spring forth: and thy righteousness shall go before thee, and the glory of God shall compass thee.
Then shalt thou cry, and God shall hearken to thee; while thou art yet speaking he will say, Behold, I am here. If thou remove from thee the band, and the stretching forth of the hands, and murmuring speech;
and if thou give bread to the hungry from thy heart, and satisfy the afflicted soul; then shall thy light spring up in darkness, and thy darkness shall be as noon-day:
and thy God shall be with thee continually, and thou shalt be satisfied according as thy soul desires; and thy bones shall be made fat, and shall be as a well-watered garden, and as a fountain from which the water has not failed.
And thy old waste desert places shall be built up, and thy foundations shall last through all generations; and thou shalt be called a repairer of breaches, and thou shalt cause thy paths between to be in peace.
If thou turn away thy foot from the sabbath, so as not to do thy pleasure on the holy days, and shalt call the sabbaths delightful, holy to God; if thou shalt not lift up thy foot to work, nor speak a word in anger out of thy mouth,
then shalt thou trust on the Lord; and he shall bring thee up to the good places of the land, and feed thee with the heritage of Jacob thy father: for the mouth of the Lord has spoken this.
And I turned, and lifted up mine eyes, and looked and behold a flying sickle.
And he said to me, What seest thou? And I said, I see a flying sickle, of the length of twenty cubits, and of the breadth of ten cubits.
And he said to me, This is the curse that goes forth over the face of the whole earth: for every thief shall be punished with death on this side, and every false swearer shall be punished on that side.
And I will bring it forth, saith the Lord Almighty, and it shall enter into the house of the thief, and into the house of him that swears falsely by my name: and it shall rest in the midst of his house, and shall consume it, and the timber of it, and the stones of it.
And the angel that talked with me went forth, and said to me, Lift up thine eyes, and see this that goes forth.
And I said, What is it? And he said, This is the measure that goes forth. And he said, This is their iniquity in all the earth.
And behold a talent of lead lifted up: and behold a woman sat in the midst of the measure.
And he said, This is iniquity. And he cast it into the midst of the measure, and cast the weight of lead on the mouth of it.
And I lifted up mine eyes, and saw, and, behold, two women coming forth, and the wind was in their wings; and they had stork's wings: and they lifted up the measure between the earth and the sky.
And I said to the angel that spoke with me, Whither do these carry away the measure?
And he said to me, To build it a house in the land of Babylon, and to prepare a place for it; and they shall set it there on its own base.
Wise women build houses: but a foolish one digs hers down with her hands.
He that walks uprightly fears the Lord; but he that is perverse in his ways shall be dishonoured.
Out of the mouth of fools comes a rod of pride; but the lips of the wise preserve them.
Where no oxen are, the cribs are clean; but where there is abundant produce, the strength of the ox is apparent.
A faithful witness does not lie; but an unjust witness kindles falsehoods.
Thou shalt seek wisdom with bad men, and shalt not find it; but discretion is easily available with the prudent.
All things are adverse to a foolish man; but wise lips are the weapons of discretion.
The wisdom of the prudent will understand their ways; but the folly of fools leads astray.
The houses of transgressors will need purification; but the houses of the just are acceptable.
If a man's mind is intelligent, his soul is sorrowful; and when he rejoices, he has no fellowship with pride.
The houses of ungodly men shall be utterly destroyed; but the tabernacles of them that walk uprightly shall stand.
There is a way which seems to be right with men, but the ends of it reach to the depths of hell.
Grief mingles not with mirth; and joy in the end comes to grief.
A stout-hearted man shall be filled with his own ways; and a good man with his own thoughts.
The simple believes every word: but the prudent man betakes himself to after-thought.
A wise man fears, and departs from evil; but the fool trusts in himself, and joins himself with the transgressor.
A passionate man acts inconsiderately; but a sensible man bears up under many things.
Fools shall have mischief for their portion; but the prudent shall take fast hold of understanding.
Evil men shall fall before the good; and the ungodly shall attend at the gates of the righteous.
Friends will hate poor friends; but the friends of the rich are many.
He that dishonours the needy sins: but he that has pity on the poor is most blessed.
They that go astray devise evils: but the good devise mercy and truth. The framers of evil do not understand mercy and truth: but compassion and faithfulness are with the framers of good.
With every one who is careful there is abundance: but the pleasure-taking and indolent shall be in want.
A prudent man is the crown of the wise: but the occupation of fools is evil.
A faithful witness shall deliver a soul from evil: but a deceitful man kindles falsehoods.
In the fear of the Lord is strong confidence: and he leaves his children a support.
The commandment of the Lord is a fountain of life; and it causes men to turn aside from the snare of death.
In a populous nation is the glory of a king: but in the failure of people is the ruin of a prince.
A man slow to wrath abounds in wisdom: but a man of impatient spirit is very foolish.
A meek-spirited man is a healer of the heart: but a sensitive heart is a corruption of the bones.
He that oppresses the needy provokes his Maker: but he that honours him has pity upon the poor.
The ungodly shall be driven away in his wickedness: but he who is secure in his own holiness is just.
There is wisdom in the good heart of a man: but in the heart of fools it is not discerned.
Righteousness exalts a nation: but sins diminish tribes.
An understanding servant is acceptable to a king; and by his good behaviour he removes disgrace.
And Jothor the priest of Madiam, the father-in-law of Moses, heard of all that the Lord did to his people Israel; for the Lord brought Israel out of Egypt.
And Jothor the father-in-law of Moses, took Sepphora the wife of Moses after she had been sent away,
and her two sons: the name of the one was Gersam, his father saying, I was a sojourner in a strange land;
and the name of the second Eliezer, saying, For the God of my father is my helper, and he has rescued me out of the hand of Pharao.
And Jothor the father-in-law of Moses, and his sons and his wife, went forth to Moses into the wilderness, where he encamped on the mount of God.
And it was told Moses, saying, Behold, thy father-in-law Jothor is coming to thee, and thy wife and two sons with him.
And Moses went forth to meet his father-in-law, and did him reverence, and kissed him, and they embraced each other, and he brought them into the tent.
And Moses related to his father-in-law all things that the Lord did to Pharao and all the Egyptians for Israel's sake, and all the labour that had befallen them in the way, and that the Lord had rescued them out of the hand of Pharao, and out of the hand of the Egyptians.
And Jothor was amazed at all the good things which the Lord did to them, forasmuch as he rescued them out of the hand of the Egyptians and out of the hand of Pharao.
And Jothor said, Blessed be the Lord, because he has rescued them out of the hand of the Egyptians and out of the hand of Pharao.
Now know I that the Lord is great above all gods, because of this, wherein they attacked them.
And Jothor the father-in-law of Moses took whole burnt-offerings and sacrifices for God, for Aaron and all the elders of Israel came to eat bread with the father-in-law of Moses before God.
And it came to pass after the morrow that Moses sat to judge the people, and all the people stood by Moses from morning till evening.
And Jothor having seen all that Moses did to the people, says, What is this that thou doest to the people? wherefore sittest thou alone, and all the people stand by thee from morning till evening?
And Moses says to his father-in-law, Because the people come to me to seek judgment from God.
For whenever there is a dispute among them, and they come to me, I give judgment upon each, and I teach them the ordinances of God and his law.
And the father-in-law of Moses said to him, Thou dost not this thing rightly,
thou wilt wear away with intolerable weariness, both those and all this people which is with thee: this thing is hard, thou wilt not be able to endure it thyself alone.
Now then hearken to me, and I will advise thee, and God shall be with thee: be thou to the people in the things pertaining to God, and thou shalt bring their matters to God.
And thou shalt testify to them the ordinances of God and his law, and thou shalt shew to them the ways in which they shall walk, and the works which they shall do.
And do thou look out for thyself out of all the people able men, fearing God, righteous men, hating pride, and thou shalt set over the people captains of thousands and captains of hundreds, and captains of fifties, and captains of tens.
And they shall judge the people at all times, and the too burdensome matter they shall bring to thee, but they shall judge the smaller cases; so they shall relieve thee and help thee.
If thou wilt do this thing, God shall strengthen thee, and thou shalt be able to attend, and all this people shall come with peace into their own place.
And Moses hearkened to the voice of his father-in-law, and did whatsoever he said to him.
And Moses chose out able men out of all Israel, and he made them captains of thousands and captains of hundreds, and captains of fifties and captains of tens over the people.
And they judged the people at all times; and every too burdensome matter they brought to Moses, but every light matter they judged themselves.
And Moses dismissed his father-in-law, and he returned to his own land.
Say if thou knowest the time of the bringing forth of the wild goats of the rock, and if thou hast marked the calving of the hinds:
and if thou has hast numbered the full months of their being with young, and if thou hast relieved their pangs:
and hast reared their young without fear; and wilt thou loosen their pangs?
And who is he that sent forth the wild ass free? and who loosed his bands?
whereas I made his habitation the wilderness, and the salt land his coverts.
He laughs to scorn the multitude of the city, and hears not the chiding of the tax-gatherer.
And will the unicorn be willing to serve thee, or to lie down at thy manger?
My son, if thou wilt receive the utterance of my commandment, and hide it with thee;
thine ear shall hearken to wisdom; thou shalt also apply thine heart to understanding, and shalt apply it to the instruction of thy son.
For it thou shalt call to wisdom, and utter thy voice for understanding;
and if thou shalt seek it as silver, and search diligently for it as for treasures;
then shalt thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God.
For the Lord gives wisdom; and from his presence come knowledge and understanding,
and he treasures up salvation for them that walk uprightly: he will protect their way;
that he may guard the righteous ways: and he will preserve the way of them that fear him.
Then shalt thou understand righteousness, and judgment; and shalt direct all thy course aright.
For if wisdom shall come into thine understanding, and discernment shall seem pleasing to thy soul,
good counsel shall guard thee, and holy understanding shall keep thee;
to deliver thee from the evil way, and from the man that speaks nothing faithfully.
Alas for those who forsake right paths, to walk in ways of darkness;
who rejoice in evils, and delight in wicked perverseness;
whose paths are crooked, and their courses winding;
to remove thee far from the straight way, and to estrange thee from a righteous purpose. My son, let not evil counsel overtake thee,
of her who has forsaken the instruction of her youth, and forgotten the covenant of God.
For she has fixed her house near death, and guided her wheels near Hades with the giants.
None that go by her shall return, neither shall they take hold of right paths, for they are not apprehended of the years of life.
For had they gone in good paths, they would have found the paths of righteousness easy.
For the upright shall dwell in the earth, and the holy shall be left behind in it.
The paths of the ungodly shall perish out of the earth, and transgressors shall be driven away from it.
In that day every place shall be opened to the house of David and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem for removal and for separation.
And it shall come to pass in that day, saith the Lord of hosts, that I will utterly destroy the names of the idols from off the land, and there shall be no longer any remembrance of them: and I will cut off the false prophets and the evil spirit from the land.
And it shall come to pass, if a man will yet prophesy, that his father and his mother which gave birth to him shall say to him, Thou shalt not live; for thou has spoken lies in the name of the Lord: and his father and his mother who gave him birth shall bind him as he is prophesying.
And it shall come to pass in that day, that the prophets shall be ashamed every one of his vision when he prophesies; and they shall clothe themselves with a garment of hair, because they have lied.
And one shall say, I am not a prophet, for I am a tiller of the ground, for a man brought me up thus from my youth.
And I will say to him, What are these wounds between thine hands? and he shall say, Those with which I was wounded in my beloved house.
Awake, O sword, against my shepherds, and against the man who is my citizen, saith the Lord Almighty: smite the shepherds, and draw out the sheep: and I will bring mine hand upon the little ones.
And it shall come to pass, that in all the land, saith the Lord, two parts thereof shall be cut off and perish; but the third shall be left therein.
And I will bring the third part through the fire, and I will try them as silver is tried, and I will prove them as gold is proved: they shall call upon my name, and I will hear them, and say, This is my people: and they shall say, The Lord is my God.
And he said to me, Son of Man, eat this volume, and go and speak to the children of Israel.
So he opened my mouth, and caused me to eat the volume. And he said to me, Son of man,
thy mouth shall eat, and thy belly shall be filled with this volume that is given to thee. So I ate it; and it was in my mouth as sweet as honey.
And he said to me, Son of man, go thy way, and go in to the house of Israel, and speak my words to them.
For thou art not sent to a people of hard speech, but to the house of Israel;
neither to many nations of other speech and other tongues, nor of harsh language, whose words thou wouldest not understand: although if I had sent thee to such, they would have hearkened to thee.
But the house of Israel will not be willing to hearken to thee; for they will not hearken to me: for all the house of Israel are stubborn and hard-hearted.
And, behold, I have made thy face strong against their faces, and I will strengthen thy power against their power.
And it shall be continually stronger than a rock: be not afraid of them, neither be dismayed at their faces, because it is a provoking house.
And he said to me, Son of man, receive into thine heart all the words that I have spoken to thee, and hear them with thine ears.
And go thy way, go in to the captivity, to the children of thy people, and thou shalt speak to them, and say to them, Thus saith the Lord; whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear.
Then the Spirit took me up, and I heard behind me the voice as of a great earthquake, saying, Blessed be the glory of the Lord from his place.
And I perceived the sound of the wings of the living creatures clapping one to the other, and the sound of the wheels was near them, and the sound of the earthquake.
And the Spirit lifted me, and took me up, and I went in the impulse of my spirit; and the hand of the Lord was mighty upon me.
Then I passed through the air and came into the captivity, and went round to them that dwelt by the river of Chobar who were there; and I sat there seven days, conversant in the midst of them.
And after the seven days the word of the Lord came to me, saying, Son of man,
I have made thee a watchman to the house of Israel; and thou shalt hear a word of my mouth, and shalt threaten them from me.
When I say to the wicked, Thou shalt surely die; and thou hast not warned him, to give warning to the wicked, to turn from his ways, that he should live; that wicked man shall die in his iniquity; but his blood will I require at thy hand.
But if thou warn the wicked, and he turn not from his wickedness, and from his way, that wicked man shall die in his iniquity, and thou shalt deliver thy soul.
And when the righteous turns away from his righteousness, and commits a trespass, and I shall bring punishment before him, he shall die, because thou didst not warn him: he shall even die in his sins, because his righteousness shall not be remembered; but his blood will I require at thine hand.
But if thou warn the righteous not to sin, and he sin not, the righteous shall surely live, because thou hast warned him; and thou shalt deliver thine own soul.
And I arose, and went forth to the plain: and, behold, the glory of the Lord stood there, according to the vision, and according to the glory of the Lord, which I saw by the river of Chobar: and I fell on my face.
Then the Spirit came upon me, and set me on my feet, and spoke to me, and said to me, Go in, and shut thyself up in the midst of thine house.
And thou, son of man, behold, bonds are prepared for thee, and they shall bind thee with them, and thou shalt not come forth of the midst of them.
Also I will bind thy tongue, and thou shalt be dumb, and shalt not be to them a reprover: because it is a provoking house.
But when I speak to thee, I will open thy mouth, and thou shalt say to them, Thus saith the Lord, He that hears, let him hear; and he that is disobedient, let him be disobedient: because it is a provoking house.
He that feareth the Lord will do good, and he that hath the knowledge of the law shall obtain her.
And as a mother shall she meet him, and receive him as a wife married of a virgin.
With the bread of understanding shall she feed him, and give him the water of wisdom to drink.
He shall be stayed upon her, and shall not be moved; and shall rely upon her, and shall not be confounded.
She shall exalt him above his neighbours, and in the midst of the congregation shall she open his mouth.
He shall find joy and a crown of gladness, and she shall cause him to inherit an everlasting name.
But foolish men shall not attain unto her, and sinners shall not see her.
For she is far from pride, and men that are liars cannot remember her.
Praise is not seemly in the mouth of a sinner, for it was not sent him of the Lord.
For praise shall be uttered in wisdom, and the Lord will prosper it.
Say not thou, It is through the Lord that I fell away: for thou oughtest not to do the things that he hateth.
Say not thou, He hath caused me to err: for he hath no need of the sinful man.
The Lord hateth all abomination; and they that fear God love it not.
He himself made man from the beginning, and left him in the hand of his counsel;
If thou wilt, to keep the commandments, and to perform acceptable faithfulness.
He hath set fire and water before thee: stretch forth thy hand unto whether thou wilt.
Before man is life and death; and whether him liketh shall be given him.
For the wisdom of the Lord is great, and he is mighty in power, and beholdeth all things:
And his eyes are upon them that fear him, and he knoweth every work of man.
He hath commanded no man to do wickedly, neither hath he given any man licence to sin.
If a man put away his wife, and she depart from him, and become another man's, shall she return to him any more at all? shall not that woman be utterly defiled? ye thou hast gone a-whoring with many shepherds, and hast returned to me, saith the Lord.
Lift up thine eyes to look straight forward, and see where thou hast not been utterly defiled. Thou hast sat for them by the wayside as a deserted crow, and hast defiled the land with thy fornications and thy wickedness.
And thou didst retain many shepherds for a stumbling-block to thyself: thou hadst a whore's face, thou didst become shameless toward all.
Hast thou not called me as it were a home, and the father and guide of thy virgin-time?
Will God's anger continue for ever, or be preserved to the end? Behold, thou hast spoken and done these bad things, and hadst power to do them.
And I said after she had committed all these acts of fornication, Turn again to me. Yet she returned not. And faithless Juda saw her faithlessness.
And for all these things faithless Juda turned not to me with all her heart, but falsely.
Turn, ye children that have revolted, saith the Lord; for I will rule over you: and I will take you one of a city, and two of a family, and I will bring you in to Sion:
and I will give you shepherds after my heart, and they shall certainly tend you with knowledge.
And it shall come to pass that when ye are multiplied and increased upon the land, saith the Lord, in those days they shall say no more, The ark of the covenant of the Holy One of Israel: it shall not come to mind; it shall not be named; neither shall it be visited; nor shall this be done any more.
In those days and at that time they shall call Jerusalem the throne of the Lord; and all the nations shall be gathered to it: and they shall not walk any more after the imaginations of their evil heart.
In those days the house of Juda, shall come together to the house of Israel, and they shall come, together, from the land of the north, and from all the countries, to the land, which I caused their fathers to inherit.
And I said, So be it, Lord, for thou saidst I will set thee among children, and will give thee a choice land, the inheritance of the Almighty God of the Gentiles: and I said, Ye shall call me Father; and ye shall not turn away from me.
But as a wife acts treacherously against her husband, so has the house of Israel dealt treacherously against me, saith the Lord.
A voice from the lips was heard, even of weeping and supplication of the children of Israel: for they have dealt unrighteously in their ways, they have forgotten God their Holy One.
Turn, ye children that are given to turning, and I will heal your bruises. Behold, we will be thy servants; for thou art the Lord our God.
Draw nigh, O God, to my help.
Let them be ashamed and confounded that seek my soul: let them be turned backward and put to shame, that wish me evil.
Let them that say to me, Aha, aha, be turned back and put to shame immediately.
Let all that seek thee exult and be glad in thee: and let those that love thy salvation say continually, Let God be magnified.
But I am poor and needy; O God, help me: thou art my helper and deliverer, O Lord, delay not.
ALEPH. How will the gold be tarnished, and the fine silver changed! the sacred stones have been poured forth at the top of all the streets.
BETH. The precious sons of Zion, who were equalled in value with gold, how are they counted as earthen vessels, the works of the hands of the potter!
GIMEL. Nay, serpents have drawn out the breasts, they give suck to their young, the daughters of my people are incurably cruel, as an ostrich in a desert.
DALETH. The tongue of the sucking child cleaves to the roof of its mouth for thirst: the little children ask for bread, and there is none to break it to them.
HE. They that feed on dainties are desolate in the streets: they that used to be nursed in scarlet have clothed themselves with dung.
VAU. And the iniquity of the daughter of my people has been increased beyond the iniquities of Sodoma, the city that was overthrown very suddenly, and none laboured against her with their hands.
ZAIN. Her Nazarites were made purer than snow, they were whiter than milk, they were purified as with fire, their polishing was superior to sapphire stone.
HETH. Their countenance is become blacker than smoke; they are not known in the streets: their skin has cleaved to their bones; they are withered, they are become as a stick.
TETH. The slain with the sword were better than they that were slain with hunger: they have departed, pierced through from want of the fruits of the field.
JOD. The hands of tender-hearted women have sodden their own children: they became meat for them in the destruction of the daughter of my people.
CHAPH. The Lord has accomplished his wrath; he has poured out fierce anger, and has kindled a fire in Sion, and it has devoured her foundations.
LAMED. The kings of the earth, even all that dwell in the world, believed not that an enemy and oppressor would enter through the gates of Jerusalem.
MEM. For the sins of her prophets, and iniquities of her priests, who shed righteous blood in the midst of her,
NUN. her watchmen staggered in the streets, they were defiled with blood in their weakness, they touched their raiment with it.
SAMECH. Depart ye from the unclean ones: call ye them: depart, depart, touch them not: for they are on fire, yea, they stagger: say ye among the nations, They shall no more sojourn there.
AIN. The presence of the Lord was their portion; but he will not again look upon them: they regarded not the person of the priests, they pitied not the prophets.
PHE. While we yet lived our eyes failed, while we looked in vain for our help. TSADE. We looked to a nation that could not save.
We have hunted for our little ones, that they should not walk in our streets. KOPH. Our time has drawn nigh, our days are fulfilled, our time is come.
Our pursuers were swifter than the eagles of the sky, they flew on the mountains, in the wilderness they laid wait for us.
RECHS. The breath of our nostrils, our anointed Lord, was taken in their destructive snares, of whom we said, In his shadow we shall live among the Gentiles.
CHSEN. Rejoice and be glad, O daughter of Idumea, that dwellest in the land: yet the cup of the Lord shall pass through to thee: thou shalt be drunken, and pour forth.
THAU. O daughter of Sion, thine iniquity has come to an end; he shall no more carry thee captive: he has visited thine iniquities, O daughter of Edom; he has discovered thy sins.
His foundations are in the holy mountains.
The Lord loves the gates of Sion, more than all the tabernacles of Jacob.
Glorious things have been spoken of thee, O city of God. Pause.
I will make mention of Raab and Babylon to them that know me: behold also the Philistines, and Tyre, and the people of the Ethiopians: these were born there.
A man shall say, Sion is my mother; and such a man was born in her; and the Highest himself has founded her.
The Lord shall recount it in the writing of the people, and of these princes that were born in her.
The dwelling of all within thee is as the dwelling of those that rejoice.
And this is the blessing with which Moses the man of God blessed the children of Israel before his death.
And he said, The Lord is come from Sina, and has appeared from Seir to us, and has hasted out of the mount of Pharan, with the ten thousands of Cades; on his right hand were his angels with him.
And he spared his people, and all his sanctified ones are under thy hands; and they are under thee; and he received of his words
the law which Moses charged us, an inheritance to the assemblies of Jacob.
And he shall be prince with the beloved one, when the princes of the people are gathered together with the tribes of Israel.
Let Ruben live, and not die; and let him be many in number.
And this is the blessing of Juda; Hear, Lord, the voice of Juda, and do thou visit his people: his hands shall contend for him, and thou shalt be a help from his enemies.
And to Levi he said, Give to Levi his manifestations, and his truth to the holy man, whom they tempted in the temptation; they reviled him at the water of strife.
Who says to his father and mother, I have not seen thee; and he knew not his brethren, and he refused to know his sons: he kept thine oracles, and observed thy covenant.
They shall declare thine ordinances to Jacob, and thy law to Israel: they shall place incense in the time of thy wrath continually upon thine altar.
Bless, Lord, his strength, and accept the works of his hands; break the loins of his enemies that have risen up against him, and let not them that hate him rise up.
And to Benjamin he said, The beloved of the Lord shall dwell in confidence, and God overshadows him always, and he rested between his shoulders.
And to Joseph he said, His land is of the blessing of the Lord, of the seasons of sky and dew, and of the deeps of wells below,
and of the fruits of the changes of the sun in season, and of the produce of the months,
from the top of the ancient mountains, and from the top of the everlasting hills,
and of the fullness of the land in season: and let the things pleasing to him that dwelt in the bush come on the head of Joseph, and on the crown of him who was glorified above his brethren.
His beauty is as the firstling of his bull, his horns are the horns of a unicorn; with them he shall thrust the nations at once, even from the end of the earth: these are the ten thousands of Ephraim, and these are the thousands of Manasse.
And to Zabulon he said, Rejoice, Zabulon, in thy going out, and Issachar in his tents.
They shall utterly destroy the nations, and ye shall call men there, and there offer the sacrifice of righteousness; for the wealth of the sea shall suckle thee, and so shall the marts of them that dwell by the sea-coast.
And to Gad he said, Blessed be he that enlarges Gad: as a lion he rested, having broken the arm and the ruler.
And he saw his first-fruits, that there the land of the princes gathered with the chiefs of the people was divided; the Lord wrought righteousness, and his judgment with Israel.
And to Dan he said, Dan is a lion's whelp, and shall leap out of Basan.
And to Nephthali he said, Nephthali has the fulness of good things; and let him be filled with blessing from the Lord: he shall inherit the west and the south.
And to Aser he said, Aser is blessed with children; and he shall be acceptable to his brethren: he shall dip his foot in oil.
His sandal shall be iron and brass; as thy days, so shall be thy strength.
There is not any such as the God of the beloved; he who rides upon the heaven is thy helper, and the magnificent One of the firmament.
And the rule of God shall protect thee, and that under the strength of the everlasting arms; and he shall cast forth the enemy from before thy face, saying, Perish.
And Israel shall dwell in confidence alone on the land of Jacob, with corn and wine; and the sky shall be misty with dew upon thee.
Blessed art thou, O Israel; who is like to thee, O people saved by the Lord? thy helper shall hold his shield over thee, and his sword is thy boast; and thine enemies shall speak falsely to thee, and thou shalt tread upon their neck.
THE VISION OF EGYPT. Behold, the Lord sits on a swift cloud, and shall come to Egypt: and the idols of Egypt shall be moved at his presence, and their heart shall faint within them.
And the Egyptians shall be stirred up against the Egyptians: and a man shall fight against his brother, and a man against his neighbor, city against city, and law against law.
And the spirit of the Egyptians shall be troubled within them; and I will frustrate their counsel: and they shall enquire of their gods and their images, and them that speak out of the earth, and them that have in them a divining spirit.
And I will deliver Egypt into the hands of men, of cruel lords; and cruel kings shall rule over them: thus saith the Lord of hosts.
And the Egyptians shall drink the water that is by the sea, but the river shall fail, and be dried up.
And the streams shall fail, and the canals of the river; and every reservoir of water shall be dried up, in every marsh also of reed and papyrus.
And all the green herbage round about the river, and everything sown by the side of the river, shall be blasted with the wind and dried up.
And the fishermen shall groan, and all that cast a hook into the river shall groan; they also that cast nets, and the anglers shall mourn.
And shame shall come upon them that work fine flax, and them that make fine linen.
And they that work at them shall be in pain, and all that make beer shall be grieved, and be pained in their souls.
And the princes of Tanis shall be fools: as for the king's wise counsellors, their counsel shall be turned into folly: how will ye say to the king, we are sons of wise men, sons of ancient kings?
Where are now thy wise men? and let them declare to thee, and say, What has the Lord of hosts purposed upon Egypt?
The princes of Tanis have failed, and the princes of Memphis are lifted up with pride, and they shall cause Egypt to wander by tribes.
For the Lord has prepared for them a spirit of error, and they have caused Egypt to err in all their works, as one staggers who is drunken and vomits also.
And there shall be no work to the Egyptians, which shall make head or tail, or beginning or end.
But in that day the Egyptians shall be as women, in fear and in trembling because of the hand of the Lord of hosts, which he shall bring upon them.
And the land of the Jews shall be for a terror to the Egyptians: whosoever shall name it to them, they shall fear, because of the counsel which the Lord of hosts has purposed concerning it.
In that day there shall be five cities in Egypt speaking the language of Chanaan, and swearing by the name of the Lord of hosts; one city shall be called the city of Asedec.
In that day there shall be an altar to the Lord in the land of the Egyptians, and a pillar to the Lord by its border.
And it shall be for a sign to the Lord for ever in the land of Egypt: for they shall presently cry to the Lord by reason of them that afflict them, and he shall send them a man who shall save them; he shall judge and save them.
And the Lord shall be known to the Egyptians, and the Egyptians shall know the Lord in that day; and they shall offer sacrifices, and shall vow vows to the Lord, and pay them.
And the Lord shall smite the Egyptians with a stroke, and shall completely heal them: and they shall return to the Lord, and he shall hear them, and thoroughly heal them.
In that day there shall be a way from Egypt to the Assyrians, and the Assyrians shall enter into Egypt, and the Egyptians shall go to the Assyrians, and the Egyptians shall serve the Assyrians.
In that day shall Israel be third with the Egyptians and the Assyrians, blessed in the land which the Lord of hosts has blessed,
saying, Blessed be my people that is in Egypt, and that is among the Assyrians, and Israel mine inheritance.
And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to Aaron and to his sons, and to all the children of Israel, and thou shalt say to them, This is the word which the Lord has commanded, saying,
Every man of the children of Israel, or of the strangers abiding among you, who shall kill a calf, or a sheep, or a goat in the camp, or who shall kill it out of the camp,
and shall not bring it to the door of the tabernacle of witness, so as to sacrifice it for a whole-burnt-offering or peace-offering to the Lord to be acceptable for a sweet-smelling savour: and whosoever shall slay it without, and shall not bring it to the door of the tabernacle of witness, so as to offer it as a gift to the Lord before the tabernacle of the Lord; blood shall be imputed to that man, he has shed blood; that soul shall be cut off from his people.
That the children of Israel may offer their sacrifices, all that they shall slay in the fields, and bring them to the Lord unto the doors of the tabernacle of witness to the priest, and they shall sacrifice them as a peace-offering to the Lord.
And the priest shall pour the blood on the altar round about before the Lord by the doors of the tabernacle of witness, and shall offer the fat for a sweet-smelling savour to the Lord.
And they shall no longer offer their sacrifices to vain gods after which they go a whoring; it shall be a perpetual statute to you for your generations.
And thou shalt say to them, Whatever man of the children of Israel, or of the sons of the proselytes abiding among you, shall offer a whole-burnt-offering or a sacrifice,
and shall not bring it to the door of the tabernacle of witness to sacrifice it to the Lord, that man shall be destroyed from among his people.
And whatever man of the children of Israel, or of the strangers abiding among you, shall eat any blood, I will even set my face against that soul that eats blood, and will destroy it from its people.
For the life of flesh is its blood, and I have given it to you on the altar to make atonement for your souls; for its blood shall make atonement for the soul.
Therefore I said to the children of Israel, No soul of you shall eat blood, and the stranger that abides among you shall not eat blood.
And whatever man of the children of Israel, or of the strangers abiding among you shall take any animal in hunting, beast, or bird, which is eaten, then shall he pour out the blood, and cover it in the dust.
For the blood of all flesh is its life; and I said to the children of Israel, Ye shall not eat the blood of any flesh, for the life of all flesh is its blood: every one that eats it shall be destroyed.
And every soul which eats that which has died of itself, or is taken of beasts, either among the natives or among the strangers, shall wash his garments, and bathe himself in water, and shall be unclean until evening: then shall he be clean.
But if he do not wash his garments, and do not bathe his body in water, then shall he bear his iniquity.
For Sion's sake I will not hold my peace, and for Jerusalem's sake I will not rest, until her righteousness go forth as light, and my salvation burn as a torch.
And the Gentiles shall see thy righteousness, and kings thy glory: and one shall call thee by a new name, which the Lord shall name.
And thou shalt be a crown of beauty in the hand of the Lord, and a royal diadem in the hand of thy God.
And thou shalt no more be called Forsaken; and thy land shall no more be called Desert: for thou shalt be called My Pleasure, and thy land Inhabited: for the Lord has taken pleasure in thee, and thy land shall be inhabited.
And as a young man lives with a virgin, so shall thy sons dwell in thee: and it shall come to pass that as a bridegroom will rejoice over a bride, so will the Lord rejoice over thee.
And on thy walls, O Jerusalem, have I set watchmen all day and all night, who shall never cease making mention of the Lord.
For there is none like you, when he shall have established, and made Jerusalem a praise on the earth.
For the Lord has sworn by his glory, and by the might of his arm, I will no more give thy corn and thy provisions to thine enemies; nor shall strangers any more drink thy wine, for which thou has laboured.
But they that have gathered them shall eat them, and they shall praise the Lord; and they that have gathered the grapes shall drink thereof in my holy courts.
Go through my gates, and make a way for my people; and cast the stones out of the way; lift up a standard for the Gentiles.
For behold, the Lord has proclaimed to the end of the earth, say ye to the daughter of Sion, Behold, thy Saviour has come to thee, having his reward and his work before his face.
And one shall call them the holy people, the redeemed of the Lord: and thou shalt be called a city sought out, and not forsaken.
And the Philistines gather their armies to battle, and gather themselves to Socchoth of Judaea, and encamp between Socchoth and Azeca Ephermen.
And Saul and the men of Israel gather together, and they encamp in the valley, and set the battle in array against the Philistines.
And the Philistines stand on the mountain on one side, and Israel stands on the mountain on the other side, and the valley was between them.
And there went forth a mighty man out of the army of the Philistines, Goliath, by name, out of Geth, his height was four cubits and a span.
And he had a helmet upon his head, and he wore a breastplate of chain armour; and the weight of his breastplate was five thousand shekels of brass and iron.
And greaves of grass were upon his legs, and a brazen target was between his shoulders.
And the staff of his spear was like a weaver's beam, and the spear's head was formed of six hundred shekels of iron; and his armour-bearer went before him.
And he stood and cried to the army of Israel, and said to them, Why are ye come forth to set yourselves in battle array against us? Am not I a Philistine, and ye Hebrews of Saul? Choose for yourselves a man, and let him come down to me.
And if he shall be able to fight against me, and shall smite me, then will we be your servants: but if I should prevail and smite him, ye shall be our servants, and serve us.
And the Philistine said, Behold, I have defied the armies of Israel this very day: give me a man, and we will both of us fight in single combat.
And Saul and all Israel heard these words of the Philistine, and they were dismayed, and greatly terrified.
And David son of an Ephrathite said, this Eplarathite was of Bethleem Juda, and his name was Jessae, and he had eight sons. And the man passed for an old man among men in the days of Saul.
And the three elder sons of Jessae went and followed Saul to the war, and the names of his sons that went to the war were, Eliab his rst-born, and his second Aminadab, and his third son Samma.
And David himself was the younger son, and the three elder followed Saul.
And David departed and returned from Saul, to feed his fathers sheep in Bethleem;
And the Philistine advanced morning and evening, and stood up forty days.
And Jessae said to David, Take now to thy brethren an ephah of this meal, and these ten loaves, and run to the camp and give them to thy brothers.
And thou shalt carry to the captain of the thousand these ten cheeses of milk, and thou shalt see how thy brethren fare, and learn what they want.
And Saul himself and all the men of Israel were in the valley of the Oak, warring with the Philistines.
And David rose early in the morning, and left the sheep to a keeper, and took and went as Jessae commanded him, and he came to the trench and to the army as it was going out to ght, and they shouted for the battle.
And Israel and the Philistines formed their lines one opposite the other.
And David deposited his burden in the hand of a keeper, and ran to the line, and went and asked his brethren how they Were.
And while he was speaking with them, behold the Amessaean advanced, Goliath by name, the Philistine of Geth, of the armies of the Philistines, and he spoke as before, and David heard.
And all the men of Israel when they saw the man ed from before him, and they were greatly terrified.
And the men of Israel said, Have ye seen this man that comes up? for he has reproached Israel and has come up; and it shall be that the man who shall smite him, the king shall enrich him with great wealth and shall give him his daughter, and shall make his fathers house free in Israel.
and David spoke to the men who stood with him saying, Shall it indeed be done thus to the man who shall smite that Philistine, and take away reproach from Israel? for who is this uncircumcised Philistine that he has defied the army of the living God?
And the people spoke to him according to this Word, saying Thus shall it be done to the man Who shall smite him.
And Eliab his elder brother heard as he spoke to the men, and Eliab was very angry with David and said, Why hast thou thus come down, and with whom hast thou left those few sheep in the wilderness? I know thy pride and the naughtiness of thine heart, for thou art come down to see the battle.
And David said what have I done now? Have I no business here?
And he turned from him towards another, and he spoke after the same manner; and the people answered him after the former manner.
And the Words which David spoke were heard and were reported to Saul. And he took him to himself.
And David said to Saul, Let not, I pray thee, the heart of my lord be dejected within him: thy servant will go, and fight with this Philistine.
And Saul said to David, Thou wilt not in anywise be able to go against this Philistine to fight with him, for thou art a mere youth, and he a man of war from his youth.
And David said to Saul, Thy servant was tending the flock for his father; and when a lion came and a she-bear, and took a sheep out of the flock,
then I went forth after him, and smote him, and drew the spoil out of his mouth: and as he rose up against me, then I caught hold of his throat, and smote him, and slew him.
Thy servant smote both the lion and the bear, and the uncircumcised Philistine shall be as one of them: shall I not go and smite him, and remove this day a reproach from Israel? For who is this uncircumcised one, who has defied the army of the living God?
The Lord who delivered me out of the paw of the lion and out the paw of the bear, he will deliver me out of the hand of this uncircumcised Philistine. And Saul said to David, Go, and the Lord shall be with thee.
And Saul clothed David with a military coat, and put his brazen helmet on his head.
And he girt David with his sword over his coat: and he made trial walking with them once and again: and David said to Saul, I shall not be able to go with these, for I have not proved them: so they remove them from him.
And he took his staff in his hand, and he chose for himself five smooth stones out of the brook, and put them in the shepherd's scrip which he had for his store, and his sling was in his hand; and he approached the Philistine.
And the Philistine advanced and drew nigh to David, and a man bearing his shield went before him, and the Philistine looked on.
And Goliath saw David, and despised him; for he was a lad, and ruddy, with a fair countenance.
And the Philistine said to David, Am I as a dog, that thou comest against me with a staff and stones? and David said, Nay, but worse than a dog. And the Philistine cursed David by his gods.
And the Philistine said to David, Come to me, and I will give thy flesh to the birds of the air, and to the beasts of the earth.
And David said to the Philistine, Thou comest to me with sword, and with spear, and with shield; but I come to thee in the name of the Lord God of hosts of the army of Israel, which thou hast defied
this day. And the Lord shall deliver thee this day into my hand; and I will slay thee, and take away thy head from off thee, and will give thy limbs and the limbs of the army of the Philistines this day to the birds of the sky, and to the wild beasts of the earth; and all the earth shall know that there is a God in Israel.
And all this assembly shall know that the Lord delivers not by sword or spear, for the battle is the Lord's, and the Lord will deliver you into our hands.
And the Philistine arose and went to meet David.
And David stretched out his hand to his scrip, and took thence a stone, and slang it, and smote the Philistine on his forehead, and the stone penetrated through the helmet into his forehead, and he fell upon his face to the ground.
So David prevailed over the Philistine with a sling and a stone, and smote the Philistine and slew him, and there was no sword in the hand of David.
And David ran, and stood upon him, and took his sword, and slew him, and cut off his head: and the Philistines saw that their champion was dead, and they fled.
And the men of Israel and Juda arose, and shouted and pursued them as far as the entrance to Geth, and as far as the gate of Ascalon: and the slain men of the Philistines fell in the way of the gates, both to Geth, and to Accaron.
And the men of Israel returned from pursuing after the Philistines, and they destroyed their camp.
And David took the head of the Philistine, and brought it to Jerusalem; but he put his armour in his tent.
Then Eliphaz the Thaemanite answered and said,
Will a wise man give for answer a mere breath of wisdom? and does he fill up the pain of his belly,
reasoning with improper sayings, and with words wherein is no profit?
Hast not thou moreover cast off fear, and accomplished such words before the Lord?
Thou art guilty by the words of thy mouth, neither hast thou discerned the words of the mighty.
Let thine own mouth, and not me, reprove thee: and thy lips shall testify against thee.
What! art thou the first man that was born? or wert thou established before the hills?
Or hast thou heard the ordinance of the Lord? or has God used thee as his counsellor? and has wisdom come only to thee?
For what knowest thou, that, we know not? or what understandest thou, which we do not also?
Thou hast been scourged for but few of thy sins: thou hast spoken haughtily and extravagantly.
What has thine heart dared? or what have thine eyes aimed at,
that thou hast vented thy rage before the Lord, and delivered such words from thy mouth?
For who, being a mortal, is such that he shall be blameless? or, who that is born of a woman, that he should be just?
Forasmuch as he trusts not his saints; and the heaven is not pure before him.
Alas then, abominable and unclean is man, drinking unrighteousness as a draught.
But I will tell thee, hearken to me; I will tell thee now what I have seen;
things wise men say, and their fathers have not hidden.
To them alone the earth was given, and no stranger came upon them.
All the life of the ungodly is spent in care, and the years granted to the oppressor are numbered.
And his terror is in his ears: just when he seems to be at peace, his overthrow will come.
Let him not trust that he shall return from darkness, for he has been already made over to the power of the sword.
And he has been appointed to be food for vultures; and he knows within himself that he is doomed to be a carcass: and a dark day shall carry him away as with a whirlwind.
Distress also and anguish shall come upon him: he shall fall as a captain in the first rank.
For he has lifted his hands against the Lord, and he has hardened his neck against the Almighty Lord.
And he has run against him with insolence, on the thickness of the back of his shield.
And let him lodge in desolate cities, and enter into houses without inhabitant: and what they have prepared, others shall carry away.
Neither shall he at all grow rich, nor shall his substance remain: he shall not cast a shadow upon the earth.
Neither shall he in any wise escape the darkness: let the wind blast his blossom, and let his flower fall off.
Let him not think that he shall endure; for his end shall be vanity.
His harvest shall perish before the time, and his branch shall not flourish.
And let him be gathered as the unripe grape before the time, and let him fall as the blossom of the olive.
For death is the witness of an ungodly man, and fire shall burn the houses of them that receive gifts.
And he shall conceive sorrows, and his end shall be vanity, and his belly shall bear deceit.
How long, O Lord, wilt thou forget me? for ever? how long wilt thou turn away thy face from me?
How long shall I take counsel in my soul, having sorrows in my heart daily? how long shall my enemy be exalted over me?
Look on me, hearken to me, O Lord my God: lighten mine eyes, lest I sleep in death;
lest at any time mine enemy say, I have prevailed against him: my persecutors will exult if ever I should be moved.
But I have hoped in thy mercy; my heart shall exult in thy salvation.
I will sing to the Lord who has dealt bountifully with me, and I will sing psalms to the name of the Lord most high.
And the Lord said to Moses, Hew for thyself two tables of stone, as also the first were, and come up to me to the mountain; and I will write upon the tables the words, which were on the first tables, which thou brokest.
And be ready by the morning, and thou shalt go up to the mount Sina, and shalt stand there for me on the top of the mountain.
And let no one go up with thee, nor be seen in all the mountain; and let not the sheep and oxen feed near that mountain.
And Moses hewed two tables of stone, as also the first were; and Moses having arisen early, went up to the mount Sina, as the Lord appointed him; and Moses took the two tables of stone.
And the Lord descended in a cloud, and stood near him there, and called by the name of the Lord.
And the Lord passed by before his face, and proclaimed, The Lord God, pitiful and merciful, longsuffering and very compassionate, and true,
and keeping justice and mercy for thousands, taking away iniquity, and unrighteousness, and sins; and he will not clear the guilty; bringing the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, and to the children's children, to the third and fourth generation.
And Moses hasted, and bowed to the earth and worshipped;
and said, If I have found grace before thee, let my Lord go with us; for the people is stiff-necked: and thou shalt take away our sins and our iniquities, and we will be thine.
And the Lord said to Moses, Behold, I establish a covenant for thee in the presence of all thy people; I will do glorious things, which have not been done in all the earth, or in any nation; and all the people among whom thou art shall see the works of the Lord, that they are wonderful, which I will do for thee.
Do thou take heed to all things whatsoever I command thee: behold, I cast out before your face the Amorite and the Chananite and the Pherezite, and the Chettite, and Evite, and Gergesite and Jebusite:
take heed to thyself, lest at any time thou make a covenant with the dwellers on the land, into which thou art entering, lest it be to thee a stumbling-block among you.
Ye shall destroy their altars, and break in pieces their pillars, and ye shall cut down their groves, and the graven images of their gods ye shall burn with fire.
For ye shall not worship strange gods, for the Lord God, a jealous name, is a jealous God;
lest at any time thou make a covenant with the dwellers on the land, and they go a whoring after their gods, and sacrifice to their gods, and they call thee, and thou shouldest eat of their feasts,
and thou shouldest take of their daughters to thy sons, and thou shouldest give of thy daughters to their sons; and thy daughters should go a whoring after their gods, and thy sons should go a whoring after their gods.
And thou shalt not make to thyself molten gods.
And thou shalt keep the feast of unleavened bread: seven days shalt thou eat unleavened bread, as I have charged thee, at the season in the month of new corn; for in the month of new corn thou camest out from Egypt.
The males are mine, everything that opens the womb; every first-born of oxen, and every first-born of sheep.
And the first-born of an ass thou shalt redeem with a sheep, and if thou wilt not redeem it thou shalt pay a price: every first-born of thy sons shalt thou redeem: thou shalt not appear before me empty.
Six days thou shalt work, but on the seventh day thou shalt rest: there shall be rest in seed-time and harvest.
And thou shalt keep to me the feast of weeks, the beginning of wheat-harvest; and the feast of ingathering in the middle of the year.
Three times in the year shall every male of thine appear before the Lord the God of Israel.
For when I shall have cast out the nations before thy face, and shall have enlarged thy coasts, no one shall desire thy land, whenever thou mayest go up to appear before the Lord thy God, three times in the year.
Thou shalt not offer the blood of my sacrifices with leaven, neither shall the sacrifices of the feast of the passover remain till the morning.
The first-fruits of thy land shalt thou put into the house of the Lord thy God: thou shalt not boil a lamb in his mother's milk.
And the Lord said to Moses, Write these words for thyself, for on these words I have established a covenant with thee and with Israel.
And Moses was there before the Lord forty days, and forty nights; he did not eat bread, and he did not drink water; and he wrote upon the tables these words of the covenant, the ten sayings.
And when Moses went down from the mountain, there were the two tables in the hands of Moses, as then he went down from the mountain, Moses knew not that the appearance of the skin of his face was glorified, when God spoke to him.
And Aaron and all the elders of Israel saw Moses, and the appearance of the skin of his face was made glorious, and they feared to approach him.
And Moses called them, and Aaron and all the rulers of the synagogue turned towards him, and Moses spoke to them.
And afterwards all the children of Israel came to him, and he commanded them all things, whatsoever the Lord had commanded him in the mount of Sina.
For their substance was too great for them to dwell together; and the land of their sojourning could not bear them, because of the abundance of their possessions.
And Esau dwelt in mount Seir; Esau, he is Edom.
And these the generations of Esau, the father of Edom in the mount Seir.
And these the names of the sons of Esau. Eliphas, the son of Ada, the wife of Esau; and Raguel, the son of Basemath, wife of Esau.
And the sons of Eliphas were Thaeman, Omar, Sophar, Gothom, and Kenez.
These the chiefs of the son of Esau, the sons of Eliphas, the first-born of Esau; chief Thaeman, chief Omar, chief Sophar, chief Kenez,
chief Core, chief Gothom, chief Amalec. These the chiefs of Eliphas, in the land of Edom; these are the sons of Ada.
And these the sons of Raguel, the son of Esau; chief Nachoth, chief Zare, chief Some, chief Moze. These the chiefs of Raguel, in the land of Edom; these are the sons of Basemath, wife of Esau.
And Asom died; and Adad son of Barad, who cut off Madiam in the plain of Moab, ruled in his stead; and the name of his city was Getthaim.
And Adad died; and Samada of Massecca reigned in his stead.
Samada died; and Saul of Rhooboth by the river reigned in his stead.
And Saul died; and Ballenon the son of Achobor reigned in his stead.
These the names of the chiefs of Esau, in their tribes, according to their place, in their countries, and in their nations; chief Thamna, chief Gola, chief Jether,
chief Olibema, chief Helas, chief Phinon,
chief Kenez, chief Thaeman, chief Mazar,
chief Magediel, chief Zaphoin. These are the chiefs of Edom in their dwelling-places in the land of their possession; this is Esau, the father of Edom.
O Lord Almighty, God of Israel, the soul in anguish the troubled spirit, crieth unto thee.
Hear, O Lord, and have mercy; for thou art merciful: and have pity upon us, because we have sinned before thee.
For thou endurest for ever, and we perish utterly.
O Lord Almighty, thou God of Israel, hear now the prayers of the dead Israelites, and of their children, which have sinned before thee, and not hearkened unto the voice of thee their God: for the which cause these plagues cleave unto us.
Remember not the iniquities of our forefathers: but think upon thy power and thy name now at this time.
For thou art the Lord our God, and thee, O Lord, will we praise.
And for this cause thou hast put thy fear in our hearts, to the intent that we should call upon thy name, and praise thee in our captivity: for we have called to mind all the iniquity of our forefathers, that sinned before thee.
Behold, we are yet this day in our captivity, where thou hast scattered us, for a reproach and a curse, and to be subject to payments, according to all the iniquities of our fathers, which departed from the Lord our God.
Hear, Israel, the commandments of life: give ear to understand wisdom.
How happeneth it Israel, that thou art in thine enemies' land, that thou art waxen old in a strange country, that thou art defiled with the dead,
That thou art counted with them that go down into the grave?
Thou hast forsaken the fountain of wisdom.
For if thou hadst walked in the way of God, thou shouldest have dwelled in peace for ever.
Learn where is wisdom, where is strength, where is understanding; that thou mayest know also where is length of days, and life, where is the light of the eyes, and peace.
Who hath found out her place? or who hath come into her treasures?
Where are the princes of the heathen become, and such as ruled the beasts upon the earth;
They that had their pastime with the fowls of the air, and they that hoarded up silver and gold, wherein men trust, and made no end of their getting?
For they that wrought in silver, and were so careful, and whose works are unsearchable,
They are vanished and gone down to the grave, and others are come up in their steads.
Young men have seen light, and dwelt upon the earth: but the way of knowledge have they not known,
Nor understood the paths thereof, nor laid hold of it: their children were far off from that way.
It hath not been heard of in Chanaan, neither hath it been seen in Theman.
The Agarenes that seek wisdom upon earth, the merchants of Meran and of Theman, the authors of fables, and searchers out of understanding; none of these have known the way of wisdom, or remember her paths.
O Israel, how great is the house of God! and how large is the place of his possession!
Great, and hath none end; high, and unmeasurable.
There were the giants famous from the beginning, that were of so great stature, and so expert in war.
Those did not the Lord choose, neither gave he the way of knowledge unto them:
But they were destroyed, because they had no wisdom, and perished through their own foolishness.
Who hath gone up into heaven, and taken her, and brought her down from the clouds?
Who hath gone over the sea, and found her, and will bring her for pure gold?
No man knoweth her way, nor thinketh of her path.
But he that knoweth all things knoweth her, and hath found her out with his understanding: he that prepared the earth for evermore hath filled it with fourfooted beasts:
He that sendeth forth light, and it goeth, calleth it again, and it obeyeth him with fear.
The stars shined in their watches, and rejoiced: 
when he calleth them, they say, Here we be; and so with cheerfulness they shewed light unto him that made them.
This is our God, and there shall none other be accounted of in comparison of him
He hath found out all the way of knowledge, and hath given it unto Jacob his servant, and to Israel his beloved.
Afterward did he shew himself upon earth, and conversed with men.
Be glad, thou thirsty desert: let the wilderness exult, and flower as the lily.
And the desert places of Jordan shall blossom and rejoice; the glory of Libanus has been given to it, and the honour of Carmel; and my people shall see the glory of the Lord, and the majesty of God.
Be strong, ye relaxed hands and palsied knees.
Comfort one another, ye fainthearted; be strong, fear not; behold, our God renders judgment, and he will render it; he will come and save us.
Then shall the eyes of the blind be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall hear.
Then shall the lame man leap as an hart, and the tongue of the stammerers shall speak plainly; for water has burst forth in the desert, and a channel of water in a thirsty land.
And the dry land shall become pools, and a fountain of water shall be poured into the thirsty land; there shall there be a joy of birds, ready habitations and marshes.
There shall be there a pure way, and it shall be called a holy way; and there shall not pass by there any unclean person, neither shall there be there an unclean way; but the dispersed shall walk on it, and they shall not go astray.
And there shall be no lion there, neither shall any evil beast go up upon it, nor at all be found there; but the redeemed and gathered on the Lord's behalf, shall walk in it,
and shall return, and come to Sion with joy, and everlasting joy shall be over their head; for on their head shall be praise and exultation, and joy shall take possession of them: sorrow and pain, and groaning have fled away.
A Psalm of David. I will sing to thee, O Lord, of mercy and judgment; I will sing a psalm,
and I will be wise in a blameless way. When wilt thou come to me? I walked in the innocence of my heart, in the midst of my house.
I have not set before mine eyes any unlawful ting; I have hated transgressors.
A perverse heart has not cleaved to me; I have not known an evil man, forasmuch as he turns away from me.
Him that privily speaks against his neighbour, him have I driven from me: he that is proud in look and insatiable in heart, with him I have not eaten.
Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the land, that they may dwell with me: he that walked in a perfect way, the same ministered to me.
The proud doer dwelt not in the midst of my house; the unjust speaker prospered not in my sight.
Early did I slay all the sinners of the land, that I might destroy out of the city of the Lord all that work iniquity.
God is our refuge and strength, a help in the afflictions that have come heavily upon us.
Therefore will we not fear when the earth is troubled, and the mountains are removed into the depths of the seas.
Their waters have roared and been troubled, the mountains have been troubled by his might. Pause.
The flowings of the river gladden the city of God: the Most High has sanctified his tabernacle.
God is in the midst of her; she shall not be moved: God shall help her with his countenance.
The nations were troubled, the kingdoms tottered: he uttered his voice, the earth shook.
The Lord of hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is our helper. Pause.
Come, and behold the works of the Lord, what wonders he has achieved on the earth.
Putting an end to wars as for the ends of the earth; he will crush the bow, and break in pieces the weapon, and burn the bucklers with fire.
Be still, and know that I am God: I will be exalted among the nations, I will be exalted in the earth.
The Lord of hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is our helper.
Then Job answered and said to the Lord,
I know that thou canst do all things, and nothing is impossible with thee.
For who is he that hides counsel from thee? or who keeps back his words, and thinks to hide them from thee? and who will tell me what I knew not, great and wonderful things which I understood not?
But hear me, O Lord, that I also may speak: and I will ask thee, and do thou teach me.
I have heard the report of thee by the ear before; but now mine eye has seen thee.
Wherefore I have counted myself vile, and have fainted: and I esteem myself dust and ashes.
And it came to pass after the Lord had spoken all these words to Job, that the Lord said to Eliphaz the Thaemanite, Thou hast sinned, and thy two friends: for ye have not said anything true before me, as my servant Job has.
Now then take seven bullocks, and seven rams, and go to my servant Job, and he shall offer a burnt-offering for you. And my servant Job shall pray for you, for I will only accept him: for but his sake, I would have destroyed you, for ye have not spoken the truth against my servant 18.
So Eliphaz the Thaemanite, and Baldad the Sauchite, and Sophar the Minaean, went and did as the Lord commanded them: and he pardoned their sin for the sake of 18.
And the Lord prospered Job: and when he prayed also for his friends, he forgave them their sin: and the Lord gave Job twice as much, even the double of what he had before.
And all his brethren and his sisters heard all that had happened to him, and they came to him, and so did all that had known him from the first: and they ate and drank with him, and comforted him, and wondered at all that the Lord had brought upon him: and each one gave him a lamb, and four drachms' weight of gold, even of unstamped gold.
And the Lord blessed the latter end of Job, more than the beginning: and his cattle were fourteen thousand sheep, six thousand camels, a thousand yoke of oxen, a thousand she-asses of the pastures.
And there were born to him seven sons and three daughters.
And he called the first Day, and the second Casia, and the third Amalthaea's horn.
And there were not found in comparison with the daughters of Job, fairer women than they in all the world: and their father gave them an inheritance among their brethren.
And Job lived after his affliction a hundred and seventy years: and all the years he lived were two hundred and forty: and Job saw his sons and his sons' sons, the fourth generation.
And David spoke to the Lord the words of this song, in the day in which the Lord rescued him out of the hand of all his enemies, and out of the hand of Saul.
And the song was thus: O Lord, my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer,
my God; he shall be to me my guard, I will trust in him: he is my protector, and the horn of my salvation, my helper, and my sure refuge; thou shalt save me from the unjust man.
I will call upon the Lord who is worthy to be praised, and I shall be saved from my enemies.
For the troubles of death compassed me, the floods of iniquity amazed me:
the pangs of death surrounded me, the agonies of death prevented me.
When I am afflicted I will call upon the Lord, and will cry to my God, and he shall hear my voice out of his temple, and my cry shalt come into his ears.
And the earth was troubled and quaked, and the foundations of heaven were confounded and torn asunder, because the Lord was wroth with them.
There went up a smoke in his wrath, and fire out of his mouth devours: coals were kindled at it.
And he bowed the heavens, and came down, and there was darkness under his feet.
And he rode upon the cherubs and did fly, and was seen upon the wings of the wind.
And he made darkness his hiding-place; his tabernacle round about him was the darkness of waters, he condensed it with the clouds of the air.
At the brightness before him coals of fire were kindled.
The Lord thundered out of heaven, and the Most High uttered his voice.
And he sent forth arrows, and scattered them, and he flashed lightning, and dismayed them.
And the channels of the sea were seen, and the foundations of the world were discovered, at the rebuke of the Lord, at the blast of the breath of his anger.
He sent from above and took me; he drew me out of many waters.
He delivered me from my strong enemies, from them that hated me, for they were stronger than I.
The days of my affliction prevented me; but the Lord was my stay.
And he brought me into a wide place, and rescued me, because he delighted in me.
And the Lord recompensed me according to my righteousness; even according to the purity of my hands did he recompense me.
Because, I kept the ways of the Lord, and did not wickedly depart from my God.
For all his judgments and his ordinances were before me: I departed not from them.
And I shall be blameless before him, and will keep myself from my iniquity.
And the Lord will recompense me according to my righteousness, and according to the purity of my hands in his eye-sight.
With the holy thou wilt be holy, and with the perfect man thou will be perfect,
and with the excellent thou wilt be excellent, and with the froward thou will be froward.
And thou wilt save the poor people, and wilt bring down the eyes of the haughty.
For thou, Lord, art my lamp, and the Lord shall shine forth to me in my darkness.
For by thee shall I run as a girded man, and by my God shall I leap over a wall.
As for the Mighty One, his way is blameless: the word of the Lord is strong and tried in the fire: he is a protector to all that put their trust in him.
Who is strong, but the Lord? and who will be a Creator except our God?
It is the Mighty One who strengthens me with might, and has prepared my way without fault.
He makes my feet like hart's feet, and sets me upon the high places.
He teaches my hands to war, and has broken a brazen bow by my arm.
And thou hast given me the shield of my salvation, and thy propitious dealing has increased me,
so as to make room under me for my going, and my legs did not totter.
I will pursue my enemies, and will utterly destroy them; and I will not turn again till I have consumed them.
And I will crush them, and they shall not rise; and they shall fall under my feet.
And thou shalt strengthen me with power for the war; thou shalt cause them that rise up against me to bow down under me.
And thou hast caused mine enemies to flee before me, even them that hated me, and thou hast slain them.
They shall cry, and there shall be no helper; to the Lord, but he hearkens not to them.
And I ground them as the dust of the earth, I beat them small as the mire of the streets.
And thou shalt deliver me from the striving of the peoples, thou shalt keep me to be the head of the Gentiles: a people which I knew not served me.
The strange children feigned obedience to me; they hearkened to me as soon as they heard.
The strange children shall be cast away, and shall be overthrown out of their hiding places.
The Lord lives, and blessed be my guardian, and my God, my strong keeper, shall be exalted.
The Lord who avenges me is strong, chastening the nations under me,
and bringing me out from my enemies: and thou shalt set me on high from among those that rise up against me: thou shalt deliver me from the violent man.
Therefore will I confess to thee, O Lord, among the Gentiles, and sing to thy name.
He magnifies the salvation of his king, and works mercy for his anointed, even for David and for his seed for ever.
And it came to pass after the death of Moses, that the Lord spoke to Joshua the son of Naue, the minister of Moses, saying,
Moses my servant is dead; now then arise, go over Jordan, thou and all this people, into the land, which I give them.
Every spot on which ye shall tread I will give it to you, as I said to Moses.
The wilderness and Antilibanus, as far as the great river, the river Euphrates, and as far as the extremity of the sea; your costs shall be from the setting of the sun.
Not a man shall stand against you all the days of thy life; and as I was with Moses, so will I also be with thee, and I will not fail thee, or neglect thee.
Be strong and 'quit thyself like a man, for thou shalt divide the land to this people, which I sware to give to your fathers.
Be strong, therefore, and quit thyself like a man, to observe and do as Moses my servant commanded thee; and thou shalt not turn therefrom to the right hand or to the left, that thou mayest be wise in whatsoever thou mayest do.
And the book of this law shall not depart out of thy mouth, and thou shalt meditate in it day and night, that thou mayest know how to do all the things that are written in it; then shalt thou prosper, and make thy ways prosperous, and then shalt thou be wise.
Lo! I have commanded thee; be strong and courageous, be not cowardly nor fearful, for the Lord thy God is with thee in all places whither thou goest.
And Joshua commanded the scribes of the people, saying,
Go into the midst of the camp of the people, and command the people, saying, Prepare provisions; for yet three days and ye shall go over this Jordan, entering in to take possession of the land, which the Lord God of your fathers gives to you.
And to Ruben, and to Gad, and to the half tribe of Manasse, Joshua said,
Remember the word which Moses the servant of the Lord commanded you, saying, the Lord your God has caused you to rest, and has given you this land.
Let your wives and your children and your cattle dwell in the land, which he has given you; and ye shall go over well armed before your brethren, every one of you who is strong; and ye shall fight on their side;
until the Lord your God shall have given your brethren rest, as also to you, and they also shall have inherited the land, which the Lord your God gives them; then ye shall depart each one to his inheritance, which Moses gave you beyond Jordan eastward.
And they answered Joshua and said, We will do all things which thou commandest us, and we will go to every place whither thou shalt send us.
Whereinsoever we hearkened to Moses we will hearken to thee; only let the Lord our God be with thee, as he was with Moses.
And whosoever shall disobey thee, and whosoever shall not hearken to thy words as thou shalt command him, let him die; but be thou strong and courageous.
Praise the Lord, all ye nations: praise him, all ye peoples.
For his mercy has been abundant toward us: and the truth of the Lord endures for ever.
Hear, O Israel: Thou goest this day across Jordan to inherit nations greater and stronger than yourselves, cities great and walled up to heaven;
a people great and many and tall, the sons of Enac, whom thou knowest, and concerning whom thou hast heard say, Who can stand before the children of Enac?
And thou shalt know to-day, that the Lord thy God he shall go before thy face: he is a consuming fire; he shall destroy them, and he shall turn them back before thee, and shall destroy them quickly, as the Lord said to thee.
Speak not in thine heart, when the Lord thy God has destroyed these nations before thy face, saying, For my righteousness the Lord brought me in to inherit this good land.
Not for thy righteousness, nor for the holiness of thy heart, dost thou go in to inherit their land, but because of the wickedness of these nations the Lord will destroy them from before thee, and that he may establish the covenant, which the Lord sware to our fathers, to Abraam, and to Isaac, and to Jacob.
And thou shalt know to-day, that it is not for thy righteousnesses the Lord thy God gives thee this good land to inherit, for thou art a stiff-necked people.
Remember, forget not, how much thou provokedst the Lord thy God in the wilderness: from the day that ye came forth out of Egypt, even till ye came into this place, ye continued to be disobedient toward the Lord.
Also in Choreb ye provoked the Lord, and the Lord was angry with you to destroy you;
when I went up into the mountain to receive the tables of stone, the tables of the covenant, which the Lord made with you, and I was in the mountain forty days and forty nights, I ate no bread and drank no water.
And the Lord gave me the two tables of stone written with the finger of God, and on them there had been written all the words which the Lord spoke to you in the mountain in the day of the assembly.
And it came to pass after forty days and forty nights, the Lord gave me the two tables of stone, the tables of the covenant.
And the Lord said to me, Arise, go down quickly from hence, for thy people whom thou broughtest out of the land of Egypt have transgressed; they have gone aside quickly out of the way which I commanded them, and have made themselves a molten image.
And the Lord spoke to me, saying, I have spoken to thee once and again, saying, I have seen this people, and, behold, it is a stiff-necked people.
And now suffer me utterly to destroy them, and I will blot out their name from under heaven, and will make of thee a nation great and strong, and more numerous than this.
And I turned and went down from the mountain; and the mountain burned with fire to heaven; and the two tables of the testimonies were in my two hands.
And when I saw that ye had sinned against the Lord your God, and had made to yourselves a molten image, and had gone astray out of the way, which the Lord commanded you to keep;
then I took hold of the two tables, and cast them out of my two hands, and broke them before you.
And I made my petition before the Lord as also at the first forty days and forty nights: I ate no bread and drank no water, on account of all your sins which ye sinned in doing evil before the Lord God to provoke him.
And I was greatly terrified because of the wrath and anger, because the Lord was provoked with you utterly to destroy you; yet the Lord hearkened to me at this time also.
And he was angry with Aaron to destroy him utterly, and I prayed for Aaron also at that time.
And your sin which ye had made, even the calf, I took, and burnt it with fire, and pounded it and ground it down till it became fine; and it became like dust, and I cast the dust into the brook that descended from the mountain.
Also in the burning, and in the temptation, and at the graves of lust, ye provoked the Lord.
And when the Lord sent you forth from Cades Barne, saying, Go up and inherit the land which I give to you, then ye disobeyed the word of the Lord your God, and believed him not, and hearkened not to his voice.
Ye were disobedient in the things relating to the Lord from the day in which he became known to you.
And I prayed before the Lord forty days and forty nights, the number that I prayed before, for the Lord said that he would utterly destroy you.
And I prayed to God, and said, O Lord, King of gods, destroy not thy people and thine inheritance, whom thou didst redeem, whom thou broughtest out of the land of Egypt with thy great power, and with thy strong hand, and with thy high arm.
Remember Abraam, and Isaac, and Jacob thy servants, to whom thou swarest by thyself: look not upon the hardness of heart of this people, and their impieties, and their sins.
Lest the inhabitants of the land whence thou broughtest us out speak, saying, Because the Lord could not bring them into the land of which he spoke to them, and because he hated them, has he brought them forth to slay them in the wilderness.
And these are thy people and thy portion, whom thou broughtest out of the land of Egypt with thy great strength, and with thy mighty hand, and with thy high arm.
THE WORD CONCERNING TYRE. Howl, ye ships of Carthage; for she has perished, and men no longer arrive from the land of the Citians: she is led captive.
To whom are the dwellers in the island become like, the merchants of Phoenice, passing over the sea
in great waters, a generation of merchants? as when the harvest is gathered in, so are these traders with the nations.
Be ashamed, O Sidon: the sea has said, yea, the strength of the sea has said, I have not travailed, nor brought forth, nor have I brought up young men, nor reared virgins.
Moreover when it shall be heard in Egypt, sorrow shall seize them for Tyre.
Depart ye to Carthage; howl, ye that dwell in this island.
Was not this your pride from the beginning, before she was given up?
Who has devised this counsel against Tyre? Is she inferior? or has she no strength? her merchants were the glorious princes of the earth.
The Lord of hosts has purposed to bring down all the pride of the glorious ones, and to disgrace every glorious thing on the earth.
Till thy land; for ships no more come out of Carthage.
And thy hand prevails no more by sea, which troubled kings: the Lord of hosts has given a command concerning Chanaan, to destroy the strength thereof.
And men shall say, Ye shall no longer at all continue to insult and injure the daughter of Sidon: and if thou depart to the Citians, neither there shalt thou have rest.
And if thou depart to the land of the Chaldeans, this also is laid waste by the Assyrians, for her wall is fallen.
Howl, ye ships of Carthage: for your strong hold is destroyed.
And it shall come to pass in that day, that Tyre shall be left seventy years, as the time of a king, as the time of a man: and it shall come to pass after seventy years, that Tyre shall be as the song of a harlot.
Take a harp, go about, O city, thou harlot that hast been forgotten; play well on the harp, sing many songs, that thou mayest be remembered.
And it shall come to pass after the seventy years, that God will visit Tyre, and she shall be again restored to her primitive state, and she shall be a mart for all the kingdoms of the world on the face of the earth.
And her trade and her gain shall be holiness to the Lord: it shall not be gathered for them, but for those that dwell before the Lord, even all her trade, to eat and drink and be filled, and for a covenant and a memorial before the Lord.
And the host of the king of Babylon had made a rampart against Jerusalem: and Jeremias was kept in the court of the prison, which is in the king's house;
in which king Sedekias had shut him up, saying, Wherefore dost thou prophesy, saying, Thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will give this city into the hands of the king of Babylon, and he shall take it;
and Sedekias shall by no means be delivered out of the hand of the Chaldeans, for he shall certainly be given up into the hands of the king of Babylon, and his mouth shall speak to his mouth, and his eyes shall look upon his eyes;
and Sedekias shall go into Babylon, and dwell there?
AND THE WORD OF THE LORD CAME TO JEREMIAS, SAYING,
Behold, Anameel the son of Salom thy father's brother is coming to thee, saying, Buy thee my field that is in Anathoth: for thou hast the right to take it as a purchase.
So Anameel the son of Salom my father's brother came to me into the court of the prison, and said, Buy thee my field that is in the land of Benjamin, in Anathoth: for thou hast a right to buy it, and thou art the elder. So I knew that it was the word of the Lord.
And I bought the field of Anameel the son of my father's brother, and I weighed him seventeen shekels of silver.
And I wrote it in a book, and sealed it, and took the testimony of witnesses, and weighed the money in the balance.
And I took the book of the purchase that was sealed;
and I gave it to Baruch son of Nerias, son of Maasaeas, in the sight of Anameel my father's brother's son, and in the sight of the men that stood by and wrote in the book of the purchase, and in the sight of the Jews that were in the court of the prison.
And I charged Baruch in their presence, saying, Thus saith the Lord Almighty;
Take this book of the purchase, and the book that has been read; and thou shalt put it into an earthen vessel, that it may remain many days.
For thus saith the Lord; There shall yet be bought fields and houses and vineyards in this land.
And I prayed to the Lord after I had given the book of the purchase to Baruch the son of Nerias, saying,
O ever living Lord! thou hast made the heaven and the earth by thy great power, and with thy high and lofty arm: nothing can be hidden from thee.
Granting mercy to thousands, and recompensing the sins of the fathers into the bosoms of their children after them: the great, the strong God;
the Lord of great counsel, and mighty in deeds, the great Almighty God, and Lord of great name: thine eyes are upon the ways of the children of men, to give to every one according to his way:
who hast wrought signs and wonders in the land of Egypt even to this day, and in Israel, and among the inhabitants of the earth; and thou didst make for thyself a name, as at this day;
and thou didst bring out thy people Israel out of the land of Egypt with signs, and with wonders, with a mighty hand, and with a high arm, and with great sights;
and thou gavest them this land, which thou didst swear to give to their fathers, a land flowing with milk and honey;
and they went in, and took it; but they hearkened not to thy voice, and walked not in thine ordinances; they did none of the things which thou didst command them, and they caused all these calamities to happen to them.
For thus saith the Lord; As I have brought upon this people all these great evils, so will I bring upon them all the good things which I pronounced upon them.
And there shall yet be fields bought in the land, of which thou sayest, it shall be destitute of man and beast; and they are delivered into the hands of the Chaldeans.
And they shall buy fields for money, and thou shalt write a book, and seal it, and shalt take the testimony of witnesses in the land of Benjamin, and round about Jerusalem, and in the cities of Juda, and in the cities of the mountain, and in the cities of the plain, and in the cities of the south: for I will turn their captivity.
Save me, O God, by thy name, and judge me by thy might.
O God, hear my prayer; hearken to the words of my mouth.
For strangers have risen up against me, and mighty men have sought my life: they have not set God before them. Pause.
For lo! God assists me; and the Lord is the helper of my soul.
He shall return evil to mine enemies; utterly destroy them in thy truth.
I will willingly sacrifice to thee: I will give thanks to thy name, O Lord; for it is good.
For thou hast delivered me out of all affliction, and mine eye has seen my desire upon mine enemies.
Behold, thou art fair, my companion; behold, thou art fair; thine eyes are doves, beside thy veil: thy hair is as flocks of goats, that have appeared from Galaad.
Thy teeth are as flocks of shorn sheep, that have gone up from the washing; all of them bearing twins, and there is not a barren one among them.
Thy lips are as a thread of scarlet, and thy speech is comely: like the rind of a pomegranate is thy cheek without thy veil.
Thy neck is as the tower of David, that was built for an armoury: a thousand shields hang upon it, and all darts of mighty men.
Thy two breasts are as two twin fawns, that feed among the lilies.
Until the day dawn, and the shadows depart, I will betake me to the mountain of myrrh, and to the hill of frankincense.
Thou art all fair, my companion, and there is no spot in thee.
Come from Libanus, my bride, come from Libanus: thou shalt come and pass from the top of Faith, from the top of Sanir and Hermon, from the lions' dens, from the mountains of the leopards.
My sister, my spouse, thou hast ravished my heart; thou hast ravished my heart with one of thine eyes, with one chain of thy neck.
How beautiful are thy breasts, my sister, my spouse! how much more beautiful are thy breasts than wine, and the smell of thy garments than all spices!
Thy lips drop honeycomb, my spouse: honey and milk are under thy tongue; and the smell of thy garments is as the smell of Libanus.
My sister, my spouse is a garden enclosed; a garden enclosed, a fountain sealed.
Thy shoots are a garden of pomegranates, with the fruit of choice berries; camphor, with spikenard:
spikenard and saffron, calamus and cinnamon; with all woods of Libanus, myrrh, aloes, with all chief spices:
a fountain of a garden, and a well of water springing and gurgling from Libanus.
Awake, O north wind; and come, O south; and blow through my garden, and let my spices flow out.
And the borders of the tribe of the children of Manasse, (for he was the first-born of Joseph,) assigned to Machir the first-born of Manasse the father of Galaad, for he was a warrior, were in the land of Galaad and of Basan.
And there was land assigned to the other sons of Manasse according to their families; to the sons of Jezi, and to the sons of Kelez, and to the sons of Jeziel, and to the sons of Sychem, and to the sons of Symarim, and to the sons of Opher: these are the males according to their families.
And Salpaad the sons of Opher had no sons but daughters: and these are the names of the daughters of Salpaad; Maala, and Nua, and Egla, and Melcha, and Thersa.
And they stood before Eleazar the priest, and before Joshua, and before the rulers, saying, God gave a charge by the hand of Moses, to give us an inheritance in the midst of our brethren: so there was given to them by the command of the Lord an inheritance among the brethren of their father.
And their lot fell to them from Anassa, and to the plain of Labec of the land of Galaad, which is beyond Jordan.
For the daughters of the sons of Manasse inherited a portion in the midst of their brethren, and the land of Galaad was assigned to the remainder of the sons of Manasse.
And the borders of the sons of Manasse were Delanath, which is before the sons of Anath, and it proceeds to the borders even to Jamin and Jassib to the fountain of Thaphthoth.
It shall belong to Manasse, and Thapheth on the borders of Manasse shall belong to the sons of Ephraim.
And the borders shall go down to the valley of Carana southward by the valley of Jariel, (there is a turpentine tree belonging to Ephraim between that and the city of Manasse:) and the borders of Manasse are northward to the brook; and the sea shall be its termination.
Southward the land belongs to Ephraim, and northward to Manasse; and the sea shall be their cost; and northward they shall border upon Aseb, and eastward upon Issachar.
And Manasses shall have in the portion of Issachar and Aser Baethsan and their villages, and the inhabitants of Dor, and its villages, and the inhabitants of Mageddo, and its villages, and the third part of Mapheta, and its villages.
And the sons of Manasse were not able to destroy these cities; and the Chananite began to dwell in that land.
And it came to pass that when the children of Israel were strong, they made the Chananites subject, but they did not utterly destroy them.
And the sons of Joseph answered Joshua, saying, Wherefore hast thou caused us to inherit one inheritance, and one line? whereas I am a great people, and God has blessed me.
And Joshua said to them, If thou be a great people, go up to the forest, and clear the land for thyself, If mount Ephraim be too little for thee.
And they said, The mount of Ephraim does not please us, and the Chananite dwelling in it in Baethsan, and in its villages, and in the valley of Jezrael, has choice cavalry and iron.
I cried to the Lord with my voice; with my voice I made supplication to the Lord.
I will pour out before him my supplication: I will declare before him mine affliction.
When my spirit was fainting within me, then thou knewest my paths; in the very way wherein I was walking, they hid a snare for me.
I looked on my right hand, and behold, for there was none that noticed me; refuge failed me; and there was none that cared for my soul.
I cried unto thee, O Lord, and said, Thou art my hope, my portion in the land of the living.
Attend to my supplication, for I am brought very low; deliver me from them that persecute me; for they are stronger than I.
Bring my soul out of prison, that I may give thanks to thy name, O Lord; the righteous shall wait for me, until thou recompense me.
And if one steal an ox or a sheep, and kill it or sell it, he shall pay five calves for a calf, and four sheep for a sheep.
And if the thief be found in the breach made by himself and be smitten and die, there shall not be blood shed for him.
But if the sun be risen upon him, he is guilty, he shall die instead; and if a thief have nothing, let him be sold in compensation for what he has stolen.
And if the thing stolen be left and be in his hand alive, whether ox or sheep, he shall restore them two-fold.
And if any one should feed down a field or a vineyard, and should send in his beast to feed down another field, he shall make compensation of his own field according to his produce; and if he shall have fed down the whole field, he shall pay for compensation the best of his own field and the best of his vineyard.
And if fire have gone forth and caught thorns, and should also set on fire threshing-floors or ears of corn or a field, he that kindled the fire shall make compensation.
And if any one give to his neighbour money or goods to keep, and they be stolen out of the man's house, if the thief be found he shall repay double.
But if the thief be not found, the master of the house shall come forward before God, and shall swear that surely he has not wrought wickedly in regard of any part of his neighbour's deposit,
according to every injury alleged, both concerning a calf, and an ass, and a sheep, and a garment, and every alleged loss, whatsoever in fact it may be, the judgment of both shall proceed before God, and he that is convicted by God shall repay to his neighbour double.
And if any one give to his neighbour to keep a calf or sheep or any beast, and it be wounded or die or be taken, and no one know,
an oath of God shall be between both, each swearing that he has surely not at all been guilty in the matter of his neighbour's deposit; and so his master shall hold him guiltless, and he shall not make compensation.
And if it be stolen from him, he shall make compensation to the owner.
And if it be seized of beasts, he shall bring him to witness the prey, and he shall not make compensation.
And if any one borrow ought of his neighbour, and it be wounded or die or be carried away, and the owner of it be not with it, he shall make compensation.
But if the owner be with it, he shall not make compensation: but if it be a hired thing, there shall be a compensation to him instead of his hire.
And if any one deceive a virgin that is not betrothed, and lie with her, he shall surely endow her for a wife to himself.
And if her father positively refuse, and will not consent to give her to him for a wife, he shall pay compensation to her father according to the amount of the dowry of virgins.
Ye shall not save the lives of sorcerers.
Every one that lies with a beast ye shall surely put to death.
He that sacrifices to any gods but to the Lord alone, shall be destroyed by death.
And ye shall not hurt a stranger, nor afflict him; for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt.
Ye shall hurt no widow or orphan.
And if ye should afflict them by ill-treatment, and they should cry aloud to me, I will surely hear their voice.
And I will be very angry, and will slay you with the sword, and your wives shall be widows and your children orphans.
And if thou shouldest lend money to thy poor brother who is by thee, thou shalt not be hard upon him thou shalt not exact usury of him.
And if thou take thy neighbour's garment for a pledge, thou shalt restore it to him before sunset.
For this is his clothing, this is the only covering of his nakedness; wherein shall he sleep? If then he shall cry to me, I will hearken to him, for I am merciful.
Thou shalt not revile the gods, nor speak ill of the ruler of thy people.
Thou shalt not keep back the first-fruits of thy threshing floor and press. The first-born of thy sons thou shalt give to me.
So shalt thou do with thy calf and thy sheep and thine ass; seven days shall it be under the mother, and the eighth day thou shalt give it to me.
When I called upon him, the God of my righteousness heard me: thou hast made room for me in tribulation; pity me, and hearken to my prayer.
O ye sons of men, how long will ye be slow of heart? wherefore do ye love vanity, and seek falsehood? Pause.
But know ye that the Lord has done wondrous things for his holy one: the Lord will hear me when I cry to him.
Be ye angry, and sin not; feel compunction upon your beds for what ye say in your hearts. Pause.
Offer the sacrifice of righteousness, and trust in the Lord.
Many say, Who will shew us good things? the light of thy countenance, O Lord, has been manifested towards us.
Thou hast put gladness into my heart: they have been satisfied with the fruit of their corn and wine and oil.
I will both lie down in peace and sleep: for thou, Lord, only hast caused me to dwell securely.
And behold a fowler's basket.
And he said, What seest thou, Amos? And I said, A fowler's basket. And the Lord said to me, The end is come upon my people Israel; I will not pass by them any more.
And the ceilings of the temple shall howl in that day, saith the Lord God: there shall be many a fallen one in every place; I will bring silence upon them.
Hear now this, ye that oppress the poor in the morning, and drive the needy ones by tyranny from the earth,
saying, When will the month pass away, and we shall sell, and the sabbath, and we shall open the treasure, to make the measure small, and to enlarge the weight, and make the balance unfair?
That we may buy the poor for silver, and the needy for shoes; and we will trade in every kind of fruit.
The Lord swears against the pride of Jacob, None of your works shall ever be forgotten.
And shall not the land be troubled for these things, and shall not every one who dwells in it mourn? whereas destruction shall come up as a river, and shall descend as the river of Egypt.
And it shall come to pass in that day, saith the Lord God, that the sun shall go down at noon, and the light shall be darkened on the earth by day:
and I will turn your feasts into mourning, and all your songs into lamentation; and I will bring up sackcloth on all loins, and baldness on every head; and I will make them as the mourning of a beloved friend, and those with them as a day of grief.
Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will send forth a famine on the land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but a famine of hearing the word of the Lord.
And the waters shall be troubled from sea to sea, and from the north to the east shall men run hither and thither, seeking the word of the Lord, and they shall not find it.
In that day shall the fair virgins and the young men faint for thirst;
they who swear by the propitiation of Samaria, and who say, Thy god, O Dan, lives; and, Thy god, O Bersabee, lives; and they shall fall, and shall no more rise again.
After this Job opened his mouth, and cursed his day,
saying,
Let the day perish in which I was born, and that night in which they said, Behold a man-child!
Let that night be darkness, and let not the Lord regard it from above, neither let light come upon it.
But let darkness and the shadow of death seize it; let blackness come upon it;
let that day and night be cursed, let darkness carry them away; let it not come into the days of the year, neither let it be numbered with the days of the months.
But let that night be pain, and let not mirth come upon it, nor joy.
But let him that curses that day curse it, even he that is ready to attack the great whale.
Let the stars of that night be darkened; let it remain dark, and not come into light; and let it not see the morning star arise:
because it shut not up the gates of my mother's womb, for so it would have removed sorrow from my eyes.
For why died I not in the belly? and why did I not come forth from the womb and die immediately?
and why did the knees support me? and why did I suck the breasts?
Now I should have lain down and been quiet, I should have slept and been at rest,
with kings and councillors of the earth, who gloried in their swords;
or with rulers, whose gold was abundant, who filled their houses with silver:
or I should have been as an untimely birth proceeding from his mother's womb, or as infants who never saw light.
There the ungodly have burnt out the fury of rage; there the wearied in body rest.
And the men of old time have together ceased to hear the exactor's voice.
The small and great are there, and the servant that feared his lord.
For why is light given to those who are in bitterness, and life to those souls which are in griefs?
who desire death, and obtain it not, digging for it as for treasures;
and would be very joyful if they should gain it?
Death is rest to such a man, for God has hedged him in.
For my groaning comes before my food, and I weep being beset with terror.
For the terror of which I meditated has come upon me, and that which I had feared has befallen me.
I was not at peace, nor quiet, nor had I rest; yet wrath came upon me.
There was a man of Armathaim Sipha, of mount Ephraim, and his name was Helkana, a son of Jeremeel the son of Elias the son of Thoke, in Nasib Ephraim.
And he had two wives; the name of the one was Anna, and the name of the second Phennana. And Phennana had children, but Anna had no child.
And the man went up from year to year from his city, from Armathaim, to worship and sacrifice to the Lord God of Sabaoth at Selom: and there were Heli and his two sons Ophni and Phinees, the priests of the Lord.
And the day came, and Helkana sacrificed, and gave portions to his wife Phennana and her children.
And to Anna he gave a prime portion, because she had no child, only Helkana loved Anna more than the other; but the Lord had closed her womb.
For the Lord gave her no child in her affliction, and according to the despondency of her affliction; and she was dispirited on this account, that the Lord shut up her womb so as not to give her a child.
So she did year by year, in going up to the house of the Lord; and she was dispirited, and wept, and did not eat.
And Helkana her husband said to her, Anna: and she said to him, Here am I, my lord: and he said to her, What ails thee that thou weepest? and why dost thou not eat? and why does thy heart smite thee? am I not better to thee than ten children?
And Anna rose up after they had eaten in Selom, and stood before the Lord: and Heli the priest was on a seat by the threshold of the temple of the Lord.
And she was very much grieved in spirit, and prayed to the Lord, and wept abundantly.
And she vowed a vow to the Lord, saying, O Lord God of Sabaoth, if thou welt indeed look upon the humiliation of thine handmaid, and remember me, and give to thine handmaid a man-child, then will I indeed dedicate him to thee till the day of his death; and he shall drink no wine nor strong drink, and no razor shall come upon his head.
And it came to pass, while she was long praying before the Lord, that Heli the priest marked her mouth.
And she was speaking in her heart, and her lips moved, but her voice was not heard: and Heli accounted her a drunken woman.
And the servant of Heli said to her, How long wilt thou be drunken? take away thy wine from thee, and go out from the presence of the Lord.
And Anna answered and said, Nay, my lord, I live in a hard day, and I have not drunk wine or strong drink, and I pour out my soul before the Lord.
Count not thy handmaid for a pestilent woman, for by reason of the abundance of my importunity I have continued my prayer until now.
And Heli answered and said to her, Go in peace: the God of Israel give thee all thy petition, which thou hast asked of him.
And she said, Thine handmaid has found favour in thine eyes: and the woman went her way, and entered into her lodging, and ate and drank with her husband, and her countenance was no more sad.
And they rise early in the morning, and worship the Lord, and they go their way: and Helkana went into his house at Armathaim, and knew his wife Anna; and the Lord remembered her, and she conceived.
And it came to pass when the time was come, that she brought forth a son, and called his name Samuel, and said, Because I asked him of the Lord God of Sabaoth.
And the man Helkana and all his house went up to offer in Selom the yearly sacrifice, and his vows, and all the tithes of his land.
But Anna did not go up with him, for she said to her husband, I will not go up until the child goes up, when I have weaned him, and he shall be presented before the Lord, and he shall abide there continually.
And Helkana her husband said to her, Do that which is good in thine eyes, abide still until thou shalt have weaned him; but may the Lord establish that which comes out of thy mouth: and the woman tarried, and suckled her son until she had weaned him.
And she went up with him to Selom with a calf of three years old, and loaves, and an ephah of fine flour, and a bottle of wine: and she entered into the house of the Lord in Selom, and the child with them.
And they brought him before the Lord; and his father slew his offering which he offered from year to year to the Lord; and he brought near the child, and slew the calf; and Anna the mother of the child brought him to Heli.
And she said, I pray thee, my lord, as thy soul liveth, I am the woman that stood in thy presence with thee while praying to the Lord.
For this child I prayed; and the Lord has given me my request that I asked of him.
And I lend him to the Lord all his days that he lives, a loan to the Lord: and she said,
Thou art a prince, and hast thou brought us into a land flowing with milk and honey, and hast thou given us an inheritance of land and vineyards? wouldest thou have put out the eyes of those men? we will not go up.
And Moses was exceeding indignant, and said to the Lord, Do thou take no heed to their sacrifice: I have not taken away the desire of any one of them, neither have I hurt any one of them.
And Moses said to Core, Sanctify thy company, and be ready before the Lord, thou and Aaron and they, to-morrow.
And take each man his censer, and ye shall put incense upon them, and shall bring each one his censer before the Lord, two hundred and fifty censers, and thou and Aaron shall bring each his censer.
And each man took his censer, and they put on them fire, and laid incense on them; and Moses and Aaron stood by the doors of the tabernacle of witness.
And Core raised up against them all his company by the door of the tabernacle of witness; and the glory of the Lord appeared to all the congregation.
And the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying,
Separate your selves from the midst of this congregation, and I will consume them at once.
And they fell on their faces, and said, O God, the God of spirits and of all flesh, if one man has sinned, shall the wrath of the Lord be upon the whole congregation?
And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the congregation, saying, Depart from the company of Core round about.
And Moses rose up and went to Dathan and Abiron, and all the elders of Israel went with him.
And he spoke to the congregation, saying, Separate yourselves from the tents of these stubborn men, and touch nothing that belongs to them, lest ye be consumed with them in all their sin.
And they stood aloof from the tent of Core round about; and Dathan and Abiron went forth and stood by the doors of their tents, and their wives and their children and their store.
And Moses said, Hereby shall ye know that the Lord has sent me to perform all these works, that I have not done them of myself.
If these men shall die according to the death of all men, if also their visitation shall be according to the visitation of all men, then the Lord has not sent me.
And Moses and Aaron went in, in front of the tabernacle of witness.
And the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying,
Depart out of the midst of this congregation, and I will consume them at once: and they fell upon their faces.
And Moses said to Aaron, Take a censer, and put on it fire from the altar, and put incense on it, and carry it away quickly into the camp, and make atonement for them; for wrath is gone forth from the presence of the Lord, it has begun to destroy the people.
And Aaron took as Moses spoke to him, and ran among the congregation, for already the plague had begun among the people; and he put on incense, and made an atonement for the people.
And he stood between the dead and the living, and the plague ceased.
And they that died in the plague were fourteen thousand and seven hundred, besides those that died on account of Core.
And Aaron returned to Moses to the door of the tabernacle of witness, and the plague ceased.
And Abraam removed thence to the southern country, and dwelt between Cades and Sur, and sojourned in Gerara.
And Abraam said concerning Sarrha his wife, She is my sister, for he feared to say, She is my wife, lest at any time the men of the city should kill him for her sake. So Abimelech king of Gerara sent and took Sarrha.
And God came to Abimelech by night in sleep, and said, Behold, thou diest for the woman, whom thou hast taken, whereas she has lived with a husband.
But Abimelech had not touched her, and he said, Lord, wilt thou destroy an ignorantly and just nation?
And after Abimelech Thola the son of Phua rose up to save Israel, being the son of his father's brother, a man of Issachar; and he dwelt in Samir in mount Ephraim.
And he judged Israel twenty-three years, and died, and was buried in Samir.
And after him arose Jair of Galaad, and he judged Israel twenty-two years.
And he had thirty-two sons riding on thirty-two colts, and they had thirty-two cities; and they called them Jair's towns until this day in the land of Galaad.
And Jair died, and was buried in Rhamnon.
And the children of Israel did evil again in the sight of the Lord, and served Baalim, and Astaroth, and the gods of Aram, and the gods of Sidon, and the gods of Moab, and the gods of the children of Ammon, and the gods of the Phylistines; and they forsook the Lord, and did not serve him.
And the children of Israel said to the Lord, We have sinned: do thou to us according to all that is good in thine eyes; only deliver us this day.
And they put away the strange gods from the midst of them, and served the Lord only, and his soul was pained for the trouble of Israel.
And the children of Ammon went up, and encamped in Galaad; and the children of Israel were gathered together and encamped on the hill.
And the people the princes of Galaad said every man to his neighbour, Who is he that shall begin to fight against the children of Ammon? he shall even be head over all that dwell in Galaad.
And Joab the son of Saruia knew that the heart of the king was toward Abessalom.
And Joab sent to Thecoe, and took thence a cunning woman, and said to her, Mourn, I pray thee, and put on mourning apparel, and anoint thee not with oil, and thou shalt be as a woman mourning for one that is dead thus for many days.
And thou shalt go to the king, and speak to him according to this word. And Joab put the words in her mouth.
So the woman of Thecoe went in to the king and fell upon her face to the earth, and did him obeisance, and said, Help, O king, help.
And the king said to her, What is the matter with thee? And she said, I am indeed a widow woman, and my husband is dead.
And moreover thy handmaid had two sons, and they fought together in the field, and there was no one to part them; and the one smote the other his brother, and slew him.
And behold the whole family rose up against thine handmaid, and they said, Give up the one that smote his brother, and we will put him to death for the life of his brother, whom he slew, and we will take away even your heir: so they will quench my coal that is left, so as not to leave my husband remnant or name on the face of the earth.
And the king said to the woman, Go in peace to thy house, and I will give commandment concerning thee.
And the woman of Thecoe said to the king, On me, my lord, O king, and on my father's house be the iniquity, and the king and his throne be guiltless.
And the king said, Who was it that spoke to thee? thou shalt even bring him to me, and one shall not touch him any more.
And she said, Let now the king remember concerning his Lord God in that the avenger of blood is multiplied to destroy, and let them not take away my son. And he said, As the lord lives, not a hair of thy son shall fall to the ground.
And the woman said, Let now thy servant speak a word to my lord the king. And he said, Say on.
And the woman said, Why hast thou devised this thing against the people of God? or is this word out of the king's mouth as a transgression, so that the king should not bring back his banished?
For we shall surely die, and be as water poured upon the earth, which shall not be gathered up, and God shall take the life, even as he devises to thrust forth from him his outcast.
And now whereas I came to speak this word to my lord the king, the reason is that the people will see me, and thy handmaid will say, Let one now speak to my lord the king, if peradventure the king will perform the request of his handmaid;
for the king will hear. Let him rescue his handmaid out of the hand of the man that seeks to cast out me and my son from the inheritance of God.
And the woman said, If now the word of my lord the king be gracious, well: for as an angel of God, so is my lord the king, to hear good and evil: and the Lord thy God shall be with thee.
And the king answered, and said to the woman, Hide not from me, I pray thee, the matter which I ask thee. And the woman said, Let my lord the king by all means speak.
And the king said, Is not the hand of Joab in all this matter with thee? and the woman said to the king, As thy soul lives, my lord, O king, there is no turning to the right hand or to the left from all that my lord the king has spoken; for thy servant Joab himself charged me, and he put all these words in the mouth of thine handmaid.
In order that this form of speech might come about it was that thy servant Joab has framed this matter: and my lord is wise as is the wisdom of an angel of God, to know all things that are in the earth.
And the king said to Joab, Behold now, I have done to thee according to this thy word: go, bring back the young man Abessalom.
And Joab fell on his face to the ground, and did obeisance, and blessed the king: and Joab said, To-day thy servant knows that I have found grace in thy sight, my lord, O king, for my lord the king has performed the request of his servant.
And Joab arose, and went to Gedsur, and brought Abessalom to Jerusalem.
And the king said, Let him return to his house, and not see my face. And Abessalom returned to his house, and saw not the king's face.
And there was not a man in Israel so very comely as Abessalom: from the sole of his foot even to the crown of his head there was no blemish in him.
And when he polled his head, (and it was at the beginning of every year that he polled it, because it grew, heavy upon him,) even when he polled it, he weighed the hair of his head, two hundred shekels according to the royal shekel.
And there were born to Abessalom three sons and one daughter, and her name was Themar: she was a very beautiful woman, and she becomes the wife of Roboam son of Solomon, and she bears to him Abia.
And Abessalom remained in Jerusalem two full years, and he saw not the king's face.
And Abessalom sent to Joab to bring him in to the king, and he would not come to him: and he sent to him the second time, and he would not come.
And Abessalom said to his servants, Behold, Joab's portion in the field is next to mine, and he has in it barley; go and set it on fire. And the servants of Abessalom set the field on fire: and the servants of Joab come to him with their clothes rent, and they said to him, The servants of Abessalom have set the field on fire.
And Joab arose, and came to Abessalom into the house, and said to him, Why have thy servants set my field on fire?
And Abessalom said to Joab, Behold, I sent to thee, saying, Come hither, and I will send thee to the king, saying, Why did I come out of Gedsur? it would have been better for me to have remained there: and now, behold, I have not seen the face of the king; but if there is iniquity in me, then put me to death.
And Joab went in to the king, and brought him word: and he called Abessalom, and he went in to the king, and did him obeisance, and fell upon his face to the ground, even in the presence of the king; and the king kissed Abessalom.
Then said the Lord to me, Go and get an earthen bottle, the work of the potter, and thou shalt bring some of the elders of the people, and of the priests;
and thou shalt go forth to the burial-place of the sons of their children, which is at the entrance of the gate of Charsith; and do thou read there all these words which I shall speak to thee:
and thou shalt say to them, Hear ye the word of the Lord, ye kings of Juda, and men of Juda, and the dwellers in Jerusalem, and they that enter in by these gates; thus saith the Lord God of Israel; Behold, I will bring evil upon this place, so that the ears of every one that hears it shall tingle.
Because they forsook me, and profaned this place, and burnt incense in it to strange gods, which they and their fathers knew not; and the kings of Juda have filled this place with innocent blood,
and built high places for Baal, to burn their children in the fire, which things I commanded not, neither did I design them in my heart:
Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the Lord, when this place shall no more be called, The fall and burial-place of the son of Ennom, but, The burial-place of slaughter.
And I will bring this city to desolation and make it a hissing; every one that passes by it shall scowl, and hiss because of all her plague.
Wherefore hast thou rejected us, O God, for ever? wherefore is thy wrath kindled against the sheep of thy pasture?
Remember thy congregation which thou hast purchased from the beginning; thou didst ransom the rod of thine inheritance; this mount Sion wherein thou hast dwelt.
Lift up thine hands against their pride continually; because of all that the enemy has done wickedly in thy holy places.
And they that hate thee have boasted in the midst of thy feast; they have set up their standards for signs,
ignorantly as it were in the entrance above;
they cut down its doors at once with axes as in a wood of trees; they have broken it down with hatchet and stone cutter.
They have burnt thy sanctuary with fire to the ground; they have profaned the habitation of thy name.
They have said in their heart, even all their kindred together, Come, let us abolish the feasts of the Lord from the earth.
We have not seen our signs; there is no longer a prophet; and God will not know us any more.
How long, O God, shall the enemy reproach? shall the enemy provoke thy name forever?
Wherefore turnest thou away thine hand, and thy right hand from the midst of thy bosom for ever?
But God is our King of old; he has wrought salvation in the midst of the earth.
Thou didst establish the sea, in thy might, thou didst break to pieces the heads of the dragons in the water.
Thou didst break to pieces the heads of the dragon; thou didst give him for meat to the Ethiopian nations.
Thou didst cleave fountains and torrents; thou driedst up mighty rivers.
The day is thine, and the night is thine; thou hast prepared the sun and the moon.
Thou hast made all the borders of the earth; thou hast made summer and spring.
Remember this thy creation: an enemy has reproached the Lord, and a foolish people has provoked thy name.
Deliver not to the wild beasts a soul that gives praise to thee: forget not for ever the souls of thy poor.
Look upon thy covenant: for the dark places of the earth are filled with the habitations of iniquity.
let not the afflicted and shamed one be rejected: the poor and needy shall praise thy name.
Arise, O God, plead thy cause: remember thy reproaches that come from the foolish one all the day.
Forget not the voice of thy suppliants: let the pride of them that hate thee continually ascend before thee.
By the rivers of Babylon, there we sat; and wept when we remembered Sion.
We hung our harps on the willows in the midst of it.
For there they that had taken us captive asked of us the words of a song; and they that had carried us away asked a hymn, saying, Sing us one of the songs of Sion.
How should we sing the Lord's song in a strange land?
If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget its skill.
May my tongue cleave to my throat, if I do not remember thee; if I do not prefer Jerusalem as the chief of my joy.
Remember, O Lord, the children of Edom in the day of Jerusalem; who said, Rase it, rase it, even to its foundations.
Wretched daughter of Babylon! blessed shall he be who shall reward thee as thou hast rewarded us.
Blessed shall he be who shall seize and dash thine infants against the rock.
These are the words of the covenant, which the Lord commanded Moses to make with the children of Israel in the land of Moab, besides the covenant which he made with them in Choreb.
And Moses called all the sons of Israel and said to them, Ye have seen all things that the Lord did in the land of Egypt before you to Pharao and his servants, and all his land;
the great temptations which thine eyes have seen, the signs, and those great wonders.
Yet the Lord God has not given you a heart to know, and eyes to see, and ears to hear, until this day.
And he led you forty years in the wilderness; your garments did not grow old, and your sandals were not worn away off your feet.
Ye did not eat bread, ye did not drink wine or strong drink, that ye might know that I am the Lord your God.
And ye came as far as this place; and there came forth Seon king of Esebon, and Og king of Basan, to meet us in war.
And we smote them and took their land, and I gave it for an inheritance to Ruben and Gad, and to the half-tribe of Manasse.
And ye shall take heed to do all the words of this covenant, that ye may understand all things that ye shall do.
Ye all stand to-day before the Lord your God, the heads of your tribes, and your elders, and your judges, and your officers, every man of Israel,
your wives, and your children, and the stranger who is in the midst of your camp, from your hewer of wood even to your drawer of water,
that thou shouldest enter into the covenant of the Lord thy God and into his oaths, as many as the Lord thy God appoints thee this day;
that he may appoint thee to himself for a people, and he shall be thy God, as he said to thee, and as he sware to thy fathers, Abraam, and Isaac, and Jacob.
And I do not appoint to you alone this covenant and this oath;
but to those also who are here with you to-day before the Lord your God, and to those who are not here with you to-day.
For ye know how we dwelt in the land of Egypt, how we came through the midst of the nations through whom ye came.
And ye beheld their abominations, and their idols, wood and stone, silver and gold, which are among them.
Lest there be among you man, or woman, or family, or tribe, whose heart has turned aside from the Lord your God, having gone to serve the gods of these nations; lest there be in you a root springing up with gall and bitterness.
And it shall be if one shall hear the words of this curse, and shall flatter himself in his heart, saying, Let good happen to me, for I will walk in the error of my heart, lest the sinner destroy the guiltless with him:
God shall by no means be willing to pardon him, but then the wrath of the Lord and his jealousy shall flame out against that man; and all the curses of this covenant shall attach themselves to him, which are written in this book, and the Lord shall blot out his name from under heaven.
And the Lord shall separate that man for evil of all the children of Israel, according to all the curses of the covenant that are written in the book of this law.
And another generation shall sayeven your sons who shall rise up after you, and the stranger who shall come from a land afar off, and shall see the plagues of that land and their diseases, which the Lord has sent upon it,
brimstone and burning salt, (the whole land shall not be sown, neither shall any green thing spring, nor rise upon it, as Sodom and Gomorrha were overthrown, Adama and Seboim, which the Lord overthrew in his wrath and anger:)
and all the nations shall say, Why has the Lord done thus to this land? what is this great fierceness of anger?
And men shall say, Because they forsook the covenant of the Lord God of their fathers, the things which he appointed to their fathers, when he brought them out of the land of Egypt:
and they went and served other gods, which they knew not, neither did he assign them to them.
And the Lord was exceedingly angry with that land to bring upon it according to all the curses which are written in the book of this law.
And the Lord removed them from their land in anger, and wrath, and very great indignation, and cast them out into another land as at present.
The secret things belong to the Lord our God, but the things that are revealed belong to us and to our children for ever, to do all the words of this law.
Behold now, the Lord, the Lord of hosts, will take away from Jerusalem and from Judea the mighty man and mighty woman, the strength of bread, and the strength of water,
the great and mighty man, the warrior and the judge, and the prophet, and the counsellor, and the elder,
the captain of fifty also, and the honourable counsellor, and the wise artificer, and the intelligent hearer.
And I will make youths their princes, and mockers shall have dominion over them.
And the people shall fall, man upon man, and every man upon his neighbor: the child shall insult the elder man, and the base the honourable.
For a man shall lay hold of his brother, as one of his father's household, saying, Thou hast raiment, be thou our ruler, and let my meat be under thee.
And he shall answer in that day, and say, I will not be thy ruler; for I have no bread in my house, nor raiment: I will not be the ruler of this people.
For Jerusalem is ruined, and Judea has fallen, and their tongues have spoken with iniquity, disobedient as they are towards the Lord.
Wherefore now their glory has been brought low, and the shame of their countenance has withstood them, and they have proclaimed their sin as Sodom, and made it manifest.
Woe to their soul, for they have devised an evil counsel against themselves, saying against themselves, Let us bind the just, for he is burdensome to us: therefore shall they eat the fruits of their works.
Woe to the transgressor! evils shall happen to him according to the works of his hands.
O my people, your exactors strip you, and extortioners rule over you: O my people, they that pronounce you blesses lead you astray, and pervert the path of your feet.
But now the Lord will stand up for judgment, and will enter into judgment with his people.
The Lord himself shall enter into judgment with the elders of the people, and with their rulers: but why have ye set my vineyard on fire, and why is the spoil of the poor in your houses?
Why do ye wrong my people, and shame the face of the poor?
Thus saith the Lord, Because the daughters of Sion are haughty, and have walked with an outstretched neck, and with winking of the eyes, and motion of the feet, at the same time drawing their garments in trains, and at the same time sporting with their feet:
therefore the Lord will humble the chief daughters of Sion, and the Lord will expose their form in that day;
and the Lord will take away the glory of their raiment, the curls and the fringes, and the crescents,
and the chains, and the ornaments of their faces,
and the array of glorious ornaments, and the armlets, and the bracelets, and the wreathed work, and the finger-rings, and the ornaments for the right hand,
and the ear-rings, and the garments with scarlet borders, and the garments with purple grounds,
and the shawls to be worn in the house, and the Spartan transparent dresses,
and those made of fine linen, and the purple ones, and the scarlet ones, and the fine linen, interwoven with gold and purple, and the light coverings for couches.
And there shall be instead of a sweet smell, dust; and instead of a girdle, thou shalt gird thyself with a rope; and instead of a golden ornament for the head, thou shalt have baldness on account of thy works; and instead of a tunic with a scarlet ground, thou shalt gird thyself with sackcloth.
And thy most beautiful son whom thou lovest shall fall by the sword; and your mighty men shall fall by the sword, and shall be brought low.
And the stores of your ornaments shall mourn, and thou shalt be left alone, and shalt be levelled with the ground.
A man who wishes to separate from friends seeks excuses; but at all times he will be liable to reproach.
A senseless man feels no need of wisdom, for he is rather led by folly.
When an ungodly man comes into a depth of evils, he despises them; but dishonour and reproach come upon him.
A word in the heart of a man is a deep water, and a river and fountain of life spring forth.
It is not good to accept the person of the ungodly, nor is it holy to pervert justice in judgment.
The lips of a fool bring him into troubles, and his bold mouth calls for death.
A fool's mouth is ruin to him, and his lips are a snare to his soul.
Fear casts down the slothful; and the souls of the effeminate shall hunger.
A man who helps not himself by his labour is brother of him that ruins himself.
The name of the Lord is of great strength; and the righteous running to it are exalted.
The wealth of a rich man is a strong city; and its glory casts a broad shadow.
Before ruin a man's heart is exalted, and before honour it is humble.
Whoso answers a word before he hears a cause, it is folly and reproach to him.
A wise servant calms a man's anger; but who can endure a faint-hearted man?
The heart of the sensible man purchases discretion; and the ears of the wise seek understanding.
A man's gift enlarges him, and seats him among princes.
A righteous man accuses himself at the beginning of his speech, but when he has entered upon the attack, the adversary is reproved.
A silent man quells strifes, and determines between great powers.
A brother helped by a brother is as a strong and high city; and is as strong as a well-founded palace.
A man fills his belly with the fruits of his mouth; and he shall be satisfied with the fruits of his lips.
Life and death are in the power of the tongue; and they that rule it shall eat the fruits thereof.
He that has found a good wife has found favours, and has received gladness from God. He that puts away a good wife, puts away a good thing, and he that keeps an adulteress is foolish and ungodly.
Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Sion; proclaim it aloud, O daughter of Jerusalem; behold, the King is coming to thee, just, and a Saviour; he is meek and riding on an ass, and a young foal.
And he shall destroy the chariots out of Ephraim, and the horse out of Jerusalem, and the bow of war shall be utterly destroyed; and there shall be abundance and peace out of the nations; and he shall rule over the waters as far as the sea, and the rivers to the ends of the earth.
And thou by the blood of thy covenant has sent forth thy prisoners out of the pit that has no water.
Ye shall dwell in strongholds, ye prisoners of the congregation: and for one day of thy captivity I will recompense thee double.
For I have bent thee, O Juda, for myself as a bow, I have filled Ephraim; and I will raise up thy children, O Sion, against the children of the Greeks, and I will handle thee as the sword of a warrior.
And the Lord shall be over them, and his arrow shall go forth as lightning: and the Lord Almighty shall blow with the trumpet; and shall proceed with the tumult of his threatening.
I said in my heart, Come now, I will prove thee with mirth, and behold thou good: and, behold, this is also vanity.
I said to laughter, Madness: and to mirth, Why doest thou this:
And I examined whether my heart would excite my flesh as with wine, (though my heart guided me in wisdom,) and I desired to lay hold of mirth, until I should see of what kind is the good to the sons of men, which they should do under the sun all the days of their life.
I enlarged my work; I built me houses; I planted me vineyards.
I made me gardens and orchards, and planted in them every kind of fruit-tree.
I made me pools of water, to water from them the timber-bearing wood.
I got servants and maidens, and servants were born to me in the house: also I had abundant possession of flocks and herds, beyond all who were before me in Jerusalem.
Moreover I collected for myself both silver and gold also, and the peculiar treasures of kings and provinces: I procured me singing men and singing women, and delights of the sons of men, a butler and female cupbearers.
So I became great, and advanced beyond all that were before in Jerusalem: also my wisdom was established to me.
And whatever mine eyes desired, I withheld not from them, I withheld not my heart from all my mirth: for my heart rejoiced in all my labour; and this was my portion of all my labour.
And I looked on all my works which my hands had wrought, and on my labour which I laboured to perform: and behold, all was vanity and waywardness of spirit, and there is no advantage under the sun.
Then I looked on to see wisdom, and madness, and folly: for who is the man who will follow after counsel, in all things where in he employs it?
And I saw that wisdom excels folly, as much as light excels darkness.
The wise man's eyes are in his head; but the fool walks in darkness: and I perceived, even I, that one event shall happen to them all.
And I said in my heart, As the event of the fool is, so shall it be to me, even to me: and to what purpose have I gained wisdom? I said moreover in my heart, This is also vanity, because the fool speaks of his abundance.
For there is no remembrance of the wise man with the fool for ever; forasmuch as now in the coming days all things are forgotten: and how shall the wise man die with the fool?
So I hated life; because the work that was wrought under the sun was evil before me: for all is vanity and waywardness of spirit.
And I hated the whole of my labour which I took under the sun; because I must leave it to the man who will come after me.
And who knows whether he will be a wise man or a fool? and whether he will have power over all my labour in which I laboured, and wherein I grew wise under the sun? this is also vanity.
so I went about to dismiss from my heart all my labour wherein I had laboured under the sun.
For there is such a man that his labour is in wisdom, and in knowledge, and in fortitude; yet this man shall give his portion to one who has not laboured therein. This is also vanity and great evil.
For it happens to a man in all his labour, and in the purpose of his heart wherein he labours under the sun.
For all his days are days of sorrows, and vexation of spirit is his; in the night also his heart rests not. This is also vanity.
A man has nothing really good to eat, and to drink, and to shew his soul as good in his trouble. This also I saw, that it is from the hand of God.
For who shall eat, or who shall drink, without him?
For God has given to the man who is good in his sight, wisdom, and knowledge, and joy: but he has given to the sinner trouble, to add and to heap up, that he may give to him that is good before God; for this is also vanity and waywardness of spirit.
And there was a certain man of the tribe of Levi, who took to wife one of the daughters of Levi.
And she conceived, and bore a male child; and having seen that he was fair, they hid him three months.
And when they could no longer hide him, his mother took for him an ark, and besmeared it with bitumen, and cast the child into it, and put it in the ooze by the river.
And his sister was watching from a distance, to learn what would happen to him.
And the daughter of Pharao came down to the river to bathe; and her maids walked by the river's side, and having seen the ark in the ooze, she sent her maid, and took it up.
And having opened it, she sees the babe weeping in the ark: and the daughter of Pharao had compassion on it, and said, This is one of the Hebrew's children.
And his sister said to the daughter of Pharao, Wilt thou that I call to thee a nurse of the Hebrews, and shall she suckle the child for thee?
And the daughter of Pharao said, Go: and the young woman went, and called the mother of the child.
And the daughter of Pharao said to her, Take care of this child, and suckled it for me, and I will give thee the wages; and the woman took the child, and suckled it.
And when the boy was grown, she brought him to the daughter of Pharao, and he became her son; and she called his name, Moses, saying, I took him out of the water.
And it came to pass in that length of time, that Moses having grown, went out to his brethren the sons of Israel: and having noticed their distress, he sees an Egyptian smiting a certain Hebrew of his brethren the children of Israel.
And having looked round this way and that way, he sees no one; and he smote the Egyptian, and hid him in the sand.
And having gone out the second day he sees two Hebrew men fighting; and he says to the injurer, Wherefore smitest thou thy neighbour?
And he said, Who made thee a ruler and a judge over us? wilt thou slay me as thou yesterday slewest the Egyptian? Then Moses was alarmed, and said, If it be thus, this matter has become known.
And Pharao heard this matter, and sought to slay Moses; and Moses departed from the presence of Pharao, and dwelt in the land of Madiam; and having come into the land of Madiam, he sat on the well.
And the priest of Madiam had seven daughters, feeding the flock of their father Jothor; and they came and drew water until they filled their pitchers, to water the flock of their father Jothor.
And the shepherds came, and were driving them away; and Moses rose up and rescued them, and drew water for them, and watered their sheep.
And they came to Raguel their father; and he said to them, Why have ye come so quickly to-day?
And they said, An Egyptian delivered us from the shepherds, and drew water for us and watered our sheep.
And he said to his daughters, And where is he? and why have ye left the man? call him therefore, that he may eat bread.
And Moses was established with the man, and he gave Sepphora his daughter to Moses to wife.
And the woman conceived and bore a son, and Moses called his name Gersam, saying, I am a sojourner in a strange land.
And in those days after a length of time, the king of Egypt died; and the children of Israel groaned because of their tasks, and cried, and their cry because of their tasks went up to God.
And God heard their groanings, and God remembered his covenant made with Abraam and Isaac and Jacob.
And God looked upon the children of Israel, and was made known to them.
To thee, O Lord, have I lifted up my soul.
O my God, I have trusted in thee: let me not be confounded, neither let mine enemies laugh me to scorn.
For none of them that wait on thee shall in any wise be ashamed: let them be ashamed that transgress without cause.
Shew me thy ways, O Lord; and teach me thy paths.
Lead me in thy truth, and teach me: for thou art God my Saviour: and I have waited on thee all the day.
Remember thy compassions, O Lord, and thy mercies, for they are from everlasting.
Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my sins of ignorance: remember me according to thy mercy, for thy goodness' sake, O Lord.
Good and upright is the Lord: therefore will he instruct sinners in the way.
The meek will he guide in judgment: the meek will he teach his ways.
All the ways of the Lord are mercy and truth to them that seek his covenant and his testimonies.
For thy name's sake, O Lord, do thou also be merciful to my sin; for it is great.
Who is the man that fears the Lord? he shall instruct him in the way which he has chosen.
His soul shall dwell in prosperity; and his seed shall inherit the earth.
The Lord is the strength of them that fear him; and his covenant is to manifest truth to them.
Mine eyes are continually to the Lord; for he shall draw my feet out of the snare.
Look upon me, and have mercy upon me; for I am an only child and poor.
The afflictions of my heart have been multiplied; deliver me from my distresses.
Look upon mine affliction and my trouble; and forgive all my sins.
Look upon mine enemies; for they have been multiplied; and they have hated me with unjust hatred.
Keep my soul, and deliver me: let me not be ashamed; for I have hoped in thee.
The harmless and upright joined themselves to me: for I waited for thee, O Lord.
Deliver Israel, O God, out of all his afflictions.
Alas for me! for I am become as one gathering straw in harvest, and as one gathering grape-gleanings in the vintage, when there is no cluster for me to eat the first-ripe fruit: alas my soul!
For the godly is perished from the earth; and there is none among men that orders his way aright: they all quarrel even to blood: they grievously afflict every one his neighbour:
they prepare their hands for mischief, the prince asks a reward, and the judge speaks flattering words; it is the desire of their soul:
therefore I will take away their goods as a devouring moth, and as one who acts by a rigid rule in a day of visitation. Woe, woe, thy times of vengeance are come; now shall be their lamentations.
Trust not in friends, and confide not in guides: beware of thy wife, so as not to commit anything to her.
For the son dishonours his father, the daughter will rise up against her mother, the daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law: those in his house shall be all a man's enemies.
But I will look to the Lord; I will wait upon God my Saviour: my God will hearken to me.
Rejoice not against me, mine enemy; for I have fallen yet shall arise; for though I should sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light to me.
I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, until he make good my cause: he also shall maintain my right, and shall bring me out to the light, and I shall behold his righteousness.
And she that is mine enemy shall see it, and shall clothe herself with shame, who says, Where is the Lord thy God? mine eyes shall look upon her: now shall she be for trampling as mire in the ways.
It is the day of making of brick; that day shall be thine utter destruction, and that day shall utterly abolish thine ordinances.
And thy cities shall be levelled, and parted among the Assyrians; and thy strong cities shall be parted from Tyre to the river, and from sea to sea, and from mountain to mountain.
And the land shall be utterly desolate together with them that inhabit it, because of the fruit of their doings.
Tend thy people with thy rod, the sheep of thine inheritance, those that inhabit by themselves the thicket in the midst of Carmel: they shall feed in the land of Basan, and in the land of Galaad, as in the days of old.
And according to the days of thy departure out of Egypt shall ye see marvellous things.
The nations shall see and be ashamed; and at all their might they shall lay their hands upon their mouth, their ears shall be deafened.
They shall lick the dust as serpents crawling on the earth, they shall be confounded in their holes; they shall be amazed at the Lord our God, and will be afraid of thee.
Who is a God like thee, cancelling iniquities, and passing over the sins of the remnant of his inheritance? and he has not kept his anger for a testimony, for he delights in mercy.
He will return and have mercy upon us; he will sink our iniquities, and they shall be cast into the depth of the sea, even all our sins.
He shall give blessings truly to Jacob, and mercy to Abraam, as thou swarest to our fathers, according to the former days.
Then Job answered and said,
Yea, I know that pleading is out of my reach; and his hand has been made heavy upon my groaning.
And I would plead my own cause, and he would fill my mouth with arguments.
And I would know the remedies which he would speak to me, and I would perceive what he would tell me.
Though he should come on me in his great strength, then he would not threaten me;
for truth and reproof are from him; and he would bring forth my judgment to an end.
For if I shall go first, and exist no longer, still what do I know concerning the latter end?
For he knows already my way; and he has tried me as gold.
And I will go forth according to his commandments, for I have kept his ways; and I shall not turn aside from his commandments,
neither shall I transgress; but I have hid his words in my bosom.
And if too he has thus judged, who is he that has contradicted, for he has both willed a thing and done it.
But the Lord has softened my heart, and the Almighty has troubled me.
For I knew not that darkness would come upon me, and thick darkness has covered me before my face.
And David comes to Nomba to Abimelech the priest: and Abimelech was amazed at meeting him, and said to him, Why art thou alone, and nobody with thee?
And David said to the priest, The king gave me a command to-day, and said to me, Let no one know the matter on which I send thee, an concerning which I have charged thee: and I have charged my servants to be in the place that is called, The faithfulness of God, phellani maemoni.
And now if there are under thy hand five loaves, give into my hand what is ready.
And the priest answered David, and said, There are no common loaves under my hand, for I have none but holy loaves: if the young men have been kept at least from women, then they shall eat them.
And David answered the priest, and said to him, Yea, we have been kept from women for three days: when I came forth for the journey all the young men were purified; but this expedition is unclean, wherefore it shall be sanctified this day because of my weapons.
So Abimelech the priest gave him the shewbread; for there were no loaves there, but only the presence loaves which had been removed from the presence of the Lord, in order that hot bread should be set on, on the day on which he took them.
And there was there on that day one of Saul's servants detained before the Lord, and his name was Doec the Syrian, tending the mules of Saul.
And David said to Abimelech, See if there is here under thy hand spear or sword, for I have not brought in my hand my sword or my weapons, for the word of the king was urgent.
And the priest said, Behold the sword of Goliath the Philistine, whom thou smotest in the valley of Ela; and it is wrapt in a cloth: if thou wilt take it, take it for thyself, for there is no other except it here. And David said, Behold, there is none like it; give it me.
And he gave it him; and David arose, and fled in that day from he presence of Saul: and David came to Anchus king of Geth.
And the servants of Anchus said to him, Is not this David the king of the land? Did not the dancing women begin the son to him, saying, Saul has smitten his thousand, and David his ten thousands?
And David laid up the words in his heart, and was greatly afraid of Anchus king of Geth.
And he changed his appearance before him, and feigned himself a false character in that day; and drummed upon the doors of the city, and used extravagant gestures with his hands, and fell against the doors of the gate, and his spittle ran down upon his beard.
And Anchus said to his servants, Lo! ye see the man is mad: why have ye brought him in to me?
Am I in want of madmen, that ye have brought him in to me to play the madman? He shall not come into the house.
Rejoice, thou barren that bearest not; break forth and cry, thou that dost not travail: for more are the children of the desolate than of her that has a husband: for the Lord has said,
Enlarge the place of thy tent, and of thy curtains: fix the pins, spare not, lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy pins;
spread forth thy tent yet to the right and the left: for thy seed shall inherit the Gentiles, and thou shalt make the desolate cities to be inhabited.
Fear not, because thou has been put to shame, neither be confounded, because thou was reproached: for thou shalt forget thy former shame, and shalt no more at all remember the reproach of thy widowhood.
For it is the Lord that made thee; the Lord of hosts is his name: and he that delivered thee, he is the God of Israel, and shall be called so by the whole earth.
The Lord has not called thee as a deserted and faint-hearted woman, nor as a woman hated from her youth, saith thy God.
For a little while I left thee: but with great mercy will I have compassion upon thee.
In a little wrath I turned away my face from thee; but with everlasting mercy will I have compassion upon thee, saith the Lord that delivers thee.
From the time of the water of Noe this is my purpose: as I sware to him at that time, saying of the earth, I will no more be wroth with thee, neither when thou art threatened,
shall the mountains depart, nor shall thy hills be removed: so neither shall my mercy fail thee, nor shall the covenant of thy peace be at all removed: for the Lord who is gracious to thee has spoken it.
Afflicted and outcast thou has not been comforted: behold, I will prepare carbuncle for thy stones, and sapphire for thy foundations;
and I will make thy buttresses jasper, and thy gates crystal, and thy border precious stones.
And I will cause all thy sons to be taught of God, and thy children to be in great peace.
And thou shalt be built in righteousness: abstain from injustice, and thou shalt not fear; and trembling shall not come nigh thee.
Behold, strangers shall come to thee by me, and shall sojourn with thee, and shall run to thee for refuge.
Behold, I have created thee, not as the coppersmith blowing coals, and bringing out a vessel fit for work; but I have created thee, not for ruin, that I should destroy thee.
I will not suffer any weapon formed against thee to prosper; and every voice that shall rise up against thee for judgment, thou shalt vanquish them all; and thine adversaries shall be condemned thereby. There is an inheritance to them that serve the Lord, and ye shall be righteous before me, saith the Lord.
For thou hast scourged, and hast taken pity on me: for, behold, I see my son Tobias. And his son went in rejoicing, and told his father the great things that had happened to him in Media.
And the children of Israel, even the whole congregation, came into the wilderness of Sin, in the first month, and the people abode in Cades; and Mariam died there, and was buried there.
And there was no water for the congregation: and they gathered themselves together against Moses and Aaron.
And the people reviled Moses, saying, Would we had died in the destruction of our brethren before the Lord!
And wherefore have ye brought up the congregation of the Lord into this wilderness, to kill us and our cattle?
And wherefore is this? Ye have brought us up out of Egypt, that we should come into this evil place; a place where there is no sowing, neither figs, nor vines, nor pomegranates, neither is there water to drink.
And Moses and Aaron went from before the assembly to the door of the tabernacle of witness, and they fell upon their faces; and the glory of the Lord appeared to them.
And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying,
Take thy rod, and call the assembly, thou and Aaron thy brother, and speak ye to the rock before them, and it shall give forth its waters; and ye shall bring forth for them water out of the rock, and give drink to the congregation and their cattle.
And Moses took his rod which was before the Lord, as the Lord commanded.
And Moses and Aaron assembled the congregation before the rock, and said to them, Hear me, ye disobedient ones; must we bring you water out of this rock?
And Moses lifted up his hand and struck the rock with his rod twice; and much water came forth, and the congregation drank, and their cattle.
And the Lord said to Moses and Aaron, Because ye have not believed me to sanctify me before the children of Israel, therefore ye shall not bring this congregation into the land which I have given them.
This is the water of Strife, because the children of Israel spoke insolently before the Lord, and he was sanctified in them.
And Elius resumed and said,
What is this that thou thinkest to be according to right? who art thou that thou hast said, I am righteous before the Lord?
I will answer thee, and thy three friends.
Look up to the sky and see; and consider the clouds, how high they are above thee.
If thou hast sinned, what wilt thou do?
and if too thou hast transgressed much, what canst thou perform?
And suppose thou art righteous, what wilt thou give him? or what shall he receive of thy hand?
But none said, Where is God that made me, who appoints the night-watches;
who makes me to differ from the four-footed beasts of the earth, and from the birds of the sky?
There they shall cry, and none shall hearken, even because of the insolence of wicked men.
For the Lord desires not to look on error, for he is the Almighty One.
He beholds them that perform lawless deeds, and he will save me: and do thou plead before him, if thou canst praise him, as it is possible even now.
Rejoice in the Lord, ye righteous; praise becomes the upright.
Praise the Lord on the harp; platy to him on a psaltery of ten strings.
Sing to him a new song; play skillfully with a loud noise.
For the word of the Lord is right; and all his works are faithful.
He loves mercy and judgment; the earth is full the mercy of the Lord.
By the word of the Lord the heavens were established; and all the host of them by the breath of his mouth.
Who gathers the waters of the sea as in a bottle; who lays up the deeps in treasuries.
Let all the earth fear the Lord; and let all that dwell in the world be moved because of him.
For he spoke, and they were made; he commanded, and they were created.
The Lord frustrates the counsels of the nations; he brings to nought also the reasonings of the peoples, and brings to nought the counsels of princes.
But the counsel of the Lord endures for ever, the thoughts of his heart from generation to generation.
Blessed is the nation whose God is the Lord; the people whom he has chosen for his own inheritance.
The Lord looks out of heaven; he beholds all the sons of men.
He looks from his prepared habitation on all the dwellers on the earth;
who fashioned their hearts alone; who understands all their works.
A king is not saved by reason of a great host; and a giant shall not be delivered by the greatness of his strength.
A horse is vain for safety; neither shall he be delivered by the greatness of his power.
Behold, the eyes of the Lord are on them that fear him, those that hope in his mercy;
to deliver their souls from death, and to keep them alive in famine.
Our soul waits on the Lord; for he is our helper and defender.
For our heart shall rejoice in him, and we have hoped in his holy name.
Let thy mercy, O Lord, be upon us, according as we have hoped in thee.
And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the children of Israel, and let them turn and encamp before the village, between Magdol and the sea, opposite Beel-sepphon: before them shalt thou encamp by the sea.
And Pharao will say to his people, As for these children of Israel, they are wandering in the land, for the wilderness has shut them in.
And I will harden the heart of Pharao, and he shall pursue after them; and I will be glorified in Pharao, and in all his host, and all the Egyptians shall know that I am the Lord. And they did so.
And it was reported to the king of the Egyptians that the people had fled: and the heart of Pharao was turned, and that of his servants against the people; and they said, What is this that we have done, to let the children of Israel go, so that they should not serve us?
So Pharao yoked his chariots, and led off all his people with himself:
having also taken six hundred chosen chariots, and all the cavalry of the Egyptians, and rulers over all.
And the Lord hardened the heart of Pharao king of Egypt, and of his servants, and he pursued after the children of Israel; and the children of Israel went forth with a high hand.
And the Egyptians pursued after them, and found them encamped by the sea; and all the cavalry and the chariots of Pharao, and the horsemen, and his host were before the village, over against Beel-sepphon.
And Pharao approached, and the children of Israel having looked up, beheld, and the Egyptians encamped behind them: and they were very greatly terrified, and the children of Israel cried to the Lord;
and said to Moses, Because there were no graves in the land of Egypt, hast thou brought us forth to slay us in the wilderness? What is this that thou hast done to us, having brought us out of Egypt?
Is not this the word which we spoke to thee in Egypt, saying, Let us alone that we may serve the Egyptians? for it is better for us to serve the Egyptians than to die in this wilderness.
And Moses said to the people, Be of good courage: stand and see the salvation which is from the Lord, which he will work for us this day; for as ye have seen the Egyptians to-day, ye shall see them again no more for ever.
The Lord shall fight for you, and ye shall hold your peace.
and the Lord said to Moses, Why criest thou to me? speak to the children of Israel, and let them proceed.
And do thou lift up thy rod, and stretch forth thy hand over the sea, and divide it, and let the children of Israel enter into the midst of the sea on the dry land.
And lo! I will harden the heart of Pharao and of all the Egyptians, and they shall go in after them; and I will be glorified upon Pharao, and on all his host, and on his chariots and his horses.
And all the Egyptians shall know that I am the Lord, when I am glorified upon Pharao and upon his chariots and his horses.
And the angel of God that went before the camp of the children of Israel removed and went behind, and the pillar of the cloud also removed from before them and stood behind them.
And it went between the camp of the Egyptians and the camp of Israel, and stood; and there was darkness and blackness; and the night passed, and they came not near to one another during the whole night.
And Moses stretched forth his hand over the sea, and the Lord carried back the sea with a strong south wind all the night, and made the sea dry, and the water was divided.
And the children of Israel went into the midst of the sea on the dry land, and the water of it was a wall on the right hand and a wall on the left.
And the Egyptians pursued them and went in after them, and every horse of Pharao, and his chariots, and his horsemen, into the midst of the sea.
And it came to pass in the morning watch that the Lord looked forth on the camp of the Egyptians through the pillar of fire and cloud, and troubled the camp of the Egyptians,
and bound the axle-trees of their chariots, and caused them to go with difficulty; and the Egyptians said, Let us flee from the face of Israel, for the Lord fights for them against the Egyptians.
And the Lord said to Moses, Stretch forth tine hand over the sea, and let the water be turned back to its place, and let it cover the Egyptians coming both upon the chariots and the riders.
And Moses stretched forth his hand over the sea, and the water returned to its place toward day; and the Egyptians fled from the water, and the Lord shook off the Egyptians in the midst of the sea.
and the water returned and covered the chariots and the riders, and all the forces of Pharao, who entered after them into the sea: and there was not left of them even one.
But the children of Israel went along dry land in the midst of the sea, and the water was to them a wall on the right hand, and a wall on the left.
So the Lord delivered Israel in that day from the hand of the Egyptians, and Israel saw the Egyptians dead by the shore of the sea.
And Israel saw the mighty hand, the things which the Lord did to the Egyptians; and the people feared the Lord, and they believed God and Moses his servant.
Jacob is my servant, I will help him: Israel is my chosen, my soul has accepted him; I have put my Spirit upon him; he shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles.
He shall not cry, nor lift up his voice, nor shall his voice be heard without.
A bruised reed shall he not break, and smoking flax shall he not quench; but he shall bring forth judgment to truth.
He shall shine out, and shall not be discouraged, until he have set judgment on the earth: and in his name shall the Gentiles trust.
Thus saith the Lord God, who made the heaven, and established it; who settled the earth, and the things in it, and gives breath to the people on it, and spirit to them that tread on it:
I the Lord God have called thee in righteousness, and will hold thine hand, and will strengthen thee: and I have given thee for the covenant of a race, for a light of the Gentiles:
to open the eyes of the blind, to bring the bound and them that sit in darkness out of bonds and the prison-house.
I am the Lord God: that is my name: I will not give my glory to another, nor my praises to graven images.
Behold, the ancient things have come to pass, and so will the new things which I tell you: yea, before I tell them they are made known to you.
Sing a new hymn to the Lord: ye who are his dominion, glorify his name from the end of the earth: ye that go down to the sea, and sail upon it; the islands, and they that dwell in them.
Rejoice, thou wilderness, and the villages thereof, the hamlets, and the dwellers in Kedar: the inhabitants of the rock shall rejoice, they shall shout from the top of the mountains.
They shall give glory to God, and shall proclaim his praises in the islands.
The Lord God of hosts shall go forth, and crush the war: he shall stir up jealousy, and shall shout mightily against his enemies.
I have been silent: shall I also always be silent and forbear: I have endured like a travailing woman: I will now amaze and wither at once.
I will make desolate mountains and hills, and will dry up all their grass; and I will make the rivers islands, and dry up the pools.
And I will bring the blind by a way that they knew not, and I will cause them to tread paths which they have not known: I will turn darkness into light for them, and crooked things into straight. These things will I do, and will not forsake them.
But they are turned back: be ye utterly ashamed that trust in graven images, who say to the molten images, Ye are our gods.
Hear, ye deaf, and look up, ye blind, to see.
And who is blind, but my servants? and deaf, but they that rule over them? yea, the servants of God have been made blind.
Ye have often seen, and have not taken heed; your ears have been opened, and ye have not heard.
The Lord God has taken counsel that he might be justified, and might magnify his praise.
And I beheld, and the people were spoiled and plundered: for there is a snare in the secret chambers everywhere, and in the houses also, where they have hidden them: they became a spoil, and there was no one that delivered the prey, and there was none who said, Restore.
Who is there among you that will give ear to these things? hearken ye to the things which are coming to pass.
For what did he give to Jacob up to spoil, and Israel to them that plundered him? Did not God do it against whom they sinned? and they would not walk in his ways, nor hearken to his law.
So he brought upon them the fury of his wrath; and the war, and those that burnt round about them, prevailed against them; yet no one of them knew it, neither did they lay it to heart.
And the seven ill-favoured and lean cows devoured the seven well-favoured and choice-fleshed cows; and Pharao awoke.
And he dreamed again. And, behold, seven ears came up on one stalk, choice and good.
And, behold, seven ears thin and blasted with the wind, grew up after them.
And the chief cupbearer spoke to Pharao, saying, I this day remember my fault:
Pharao was angry with his servants, and put us in prison in the house of the captain of the guard, both me and the chief baker.
And we had a dream both in one night, I and he; we saw, each according to his dream.
And there was there with us a young man, a Hebrew servant of the captain of the guard; and we related to him , and he interpreted to us.
The seven good cows are seven years, and the seven good ears are seven years; the dream of Pharao is one.
And the seven thin kine that came up after them are seven years; and the seven thin and blasted ears are seven years; there shall be seven years of famine.
And as for the word which I have told Pharao, whatsoever God intends to do, he has shewn to Pharao:
And the plenty shall not be known in the land by reason of the famine that shall be after this, for it shall be very grievous.
And concerning the repetition of the dream to Pharao twice, because the saying which is from God shall be true, and God will hasten to accomplish it.
Now then, look out a wise and prudent man, and set him over the land of Egypt.
And let Pharao make and appoint local governors over the land; and let them take up a fifth part of all the produce of the land of Egypt for the seven years of the plenty.
And he gathered all the food of the seven years, in which was the plenty in the land of Egypt; and he laid up the food in the cities; the food of the fields of a city round about it he laid up in it.
And Joseph gathered very much corn as the sand of the sea, until it could not be numbered, for there was no number .
And to Joseph were born two sons, before the seven years of famine came, which Aseneth, the daughter of Petephres, priest of Heliopolis, bore to him.
And the seven years of plenty passed away, which were in the land of Egypt.
And the seven years of famine began to come, as Joseph said; and there was a famine in all the land; but in all the land of Egypt there was bread.
And all the land of Egypt was hungry; and the people cried to Pharao for bread. And Pharao said to all the Egyptians, Go to Joseph, and do whatsoever he shall tell you.
And the children of Israel gave to the Levites the cities and their suburbs, as the Lord commanded Moses, by lot.
And the tribe of the children of Juda, and the tribe of the children of Symeon, and part of the tribe of the children of Benjamin gave these cities, and they were assigned
to the sons of Aaron of the family of Caath of the sons of Levi, for the lot fell to these.
And they gave to them Cariatharboc the metropolis of the sons of Enac; this is Chebron in the mountain country of Juda, and the suburbs round it.
But the lands of the city, and its villages Joshua gave to the sons of Chaleb the son of Jephonne for a possession.
And to the sons of Aaron he gave the city of refuge for the slayer, Chebron, and the suburbs belonging to it; and Lemna and the suburbs belonging to it;
and Aelom and its suburbs; and Tema and its suburbs;
and Gella and its suburbs; and Dabir and its suburbs;
and Asa and its suburbs; and Tany and its suburbs; and Baethsamys and its suburbs: nine cities from these two tribes.
And from the tribe of Benjamin, Gabaon and its suburbs; and Gatheth and its suburbs;
and Anathoth and its suburbs; and Gamala and its suburbs; four cities.
All the cities of the sons of Aaron the priests, thirteen.
And to the families, even the sons of Caath the Levites, that were left of the sons of Caath, there was given their priests' city,
out of the tribe of Ephraim; and they gave them the slayer's city of refuge, Sychem, and its suburbs, and Gazara and its appendages, and its suburbs;
and Baethoron and its suburbs: four cities:
and the tribe of Dan, Helcothaim and its suburbs; and Gethedan and its suburbs:
and Aelon and its suburbs; and Getheremmon and its suburbs: four cities.
And out of the half tribe of Manasse, Tanach and its suburbs; and Jebatha and its suburbs; two cities.
In all were given ten cities, and the suburbs of each belonging to them, to the families of the sons of Caath that remained.
And Joshua gave to the sons of Gedson the Levites out of the other half tribe of Manasse cities set apart for the slayers, Gaulon in the country of Basan, and its suburbs; and Bosora and its suburbs; two cities.
And out of the tribe of Issachar, Kison and its suburbs; and Debba and its suburbs;
and Remmath and its suburbs; and the well of Letters, and its suburbs; four cities.
And out of the tribe of Aser, Basella and its suburbs; and Dabbon and its suburbs;
and Chelcat and its suburbs; and Raab and its suburbs; four cities.
And of the tribe of Nephthali, the city set apart for the slayer, Cades in Galilee, and its suburbs; and Nemmath, and its suburbs; and Themmon and its suburbs; three cities.
All the cities of Gedson according to their families were thirteen cities.
And to the family of the sons of Merari the Levites that remained, he gave out of the tribe of Zabulon, Maan and its suburbs; and Cades and its suburbs,
and Sella and its suburbs: three cities.
And beyond Jordan over against Jericho, out of the tribe of Ruben, the city of refuge for the slayer, Bosor in the wilderness; Miso and its suburbs; 
and Jazer and its suburbs; and Decmon and its suburbs; and Mapha and its suburbs; four cities.
And out of the tribe of Gad the city of refuge for the slayer, both Ramoth in Galaad, and its suburbs; Camin and its suburbs; 
and Esbon and its suburbs; and Jazer and its suburbs: the cities were four in all.
All these cities were given to the sons of Merari according to the families of them that were left out of the tribe of Levi; and their limits were the twelve cities.
All the cities of the Levites in the midst of the possession of the children of Israel, were forty-eight cities,
and their suburbs round about these cities: a city and the suburbs round about the city to all these cities: and Joshua ceased dividing the land by their borders: and the children of Israel gave a portion to Joshua because of the commandment of the Lord: they gave him the city which he asked: they gave him Thamnasachar in mount Ephraim; and Joshua built the city, and dwelt in it: and Joshua took the knives of stone, wherewith he circumcised the children of Israel that were born in the desert by the way, and put them in Thamnasachar.
So the Lord gave to Israel all the land which he sware to give to their fathers: and they inherited it, and dwelt in it.
And the Lord gave them rest round about, as he sware to their fathers: not one of all their enemies maintained his ground against them; the Lord delivered all their enemies into their hands.
There failed not one of the good things which the Lord spoke to the children of Israel; all came to pass.
And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord, and the Lord gave them into the hand of Madiam seven years.
And the hand of Madiam prevailed against Israel: and the children of Israel made for themselves because of Madiam the caves in the mountains, and the dens, and the holes in the rocks.
And it came to pass when the children of Israel sowed, that Madiam and Amalec went up, and the children of the east went up together with them.
And they encamped against them, and destroyed their fruits until they came to Gaza; and they left not the support of life in the land of Israel, not even ox or ass among the herds.
For they and their stock came up, and their tents were with them, as the locust in multitude, and there was no number to them and their camels; and they came to the land of Israel, and laid it waste.
And Israel was greatly impoverished because of Madiam.
And the children of Israel cried to the Lord because of Madiam.
And the Lord sent a prophet to the children of Israel; and he said to them, Thus says the Lord God of Israel, I am he that brought you up out of the land of Egypt, and I brought you up out of the house of your bondage.
And I delivered you out of the hand of Egypt, and out of the hand of all that afflicted you, and I cast them out before you; and I gave you their land.
And I said to you, I am the Lord your God: ye shall not fear the gods of the Amorites, in whose land ye dwell; but ye hearkened not to my voice.
And an angel of the Lord came, and sat down under the fir tree, which was in Ephratha in the land of Joas father of Esdri; and Gedeon his son was threshing wheat in a wine-press in order to escape from the face of Madiam.
And the angel of the Lord appeared to him and said to him, The Lord is with thee, thou mighty in strength.
And Gedeon said to him, Be gracious with me, my Lord: but if the Lord is with us, why have these evils found us? and where are all his miracles, which our fathers have related to us, saying, Did not the Lord bring us up out of Egypt? and now he has cast us out, and given us into the hand of Madiam.
And the angel of the Lord turned to him, and said, Go in this thy strength, and thou shalt save Israel out of the hand of Madiam: behold, I have sent thee.
And Gedeon said to him, Be gracious with me, my Lord: whereby shall I save Israel? behold, my thousand is weakened in Manasse, and I am the least in my father's house.
And the angel of the Lord said to him, The Lord shall be with thee, and thou shalt smite Madiam as one man.
And Gedeon said to him, If now I have found mercy in thine eyes, and thou wilt do this day for me all that thou hast spoken of with me,
depart not hence until I come to thee, and I will bring forth an offering and offer it before thee: and he said, I will remain until thou return.
And Gedeon went in, and prepared a kid of the goats, and an ephah of fine flour unleavened; and he put the flesh in the basket, and poured the broth into the pot, and brought them forth to him under the turpentine tree, and drew nigh.
And the angel of God said to him, Take the flesh and the unleavened cakes, and put them on that rock, and pour out the broth close by: and he did so.
And the angel of the Lord stretched out the end of the rod that was in his hand, and touched the flesh and the unleavened bread; and fire came up out of the rock, and consumed the flesh and the unleavened bread, and the angel of the Lord vanished from his sight.
And Gedeon saw that he was an angel of the Lord; and Gedeon said, Ah, ah, Lord my God! for I have seen the angel of the Lord face to face.
And the Lord said to him, Peace be to thee, fear not, thou shalt not die.
And Gedeon built there an altar to the Lord, and called it The peace of the Lord, until this day, as it is still inEphratha of the father of Esdri.
And it came to pass in that night, that the Lord said to him, Take the young bullock which thy father has, even the second bullock of seven years old, and thou shalt destroy the altar of Baal which thy father has, and the grove which is by itthou shalt destroy.
And thou shalt build an altar to the Lord thy God on the top of this Maozi in the orderingit, and thou shalt take the second bullock, and shalt offer up whole-burnt-offerings with the wood of the grove, which thou shalt destroy.
And Gedeon took ten men of his servants, and did as the Lord spoke to him: and it came to pass, as he feared the house of his father and the men of the city if he should do it by day, that he did it by night.
And the men of the city rose up early in the morning; and behold, the altar of Baal had been demolished, and the grove by it had been destroyed; and they saw the second bullock, which Gedeon offered on the altar that had been built.
And a man said to his neighbour, Who has done this thing? and they enquired and searched, and learnt that Gedeon the son of Joas had done this thing.
And the men of the city said to Joas, Bring out thy son, and let him die, because he has destroyed the altar of Baal, and because he has destroyed the grove that is by it.
And Gedeon the son of Joas said to all the men who rose up against him, Do ye now plead for Baal, or will ye save him? whoever will plead for him, let him be slain this morning: if he be a god let him plead for himself, because one has thrown down his altar.
And he called it in that day Jerobaal, saying, Let Baal plead thereby, because his altar has been thrown down.
And all Madiam, and Amalek, and the sons of the east gathered themselves together, and encamped in the valley of Jezrael.
And the Spirit of the Lord came upon Gedeon, and he blew with the horn, and Abiezer came to help after him.
And Gedeon sent messengers into all Manasse, and into Aser, and into Zabulon, and into Nephthali; and he went up to meet them.
And Gedeon said to God, If thou wilt save Israel by my hand, as thou hast said,
behold, I put the fleece of wool in the threshing-floor: if there be dew on the fleece only, and drought on all the ground, I shall know that thou wilt save Israel by my hand, as thou hast said.
And it was so: and he rose up early in the morning, and wrung the fleece, and dew dropped from the fleece, a bowl full of water.
And Gedeon said to God, Let not, I pray thee, thine anger be kindled with me, and I will speak yet once; I will even yet make one trial more with the fleece: let now the drought be upon the fleece only, and let there be dew on all the ground.
And God did so in that night; and there was drought on the fleece only, and on all the ground there was dew.
And it came to pass after this that David enquired of the Lord, saying, Shall I go up into one of the cities of Juda? and the Lord said to him, Go up. And David said, Whither shall I go up? and he said, To Chebron.
And David went up thither to Chebron, he and both his wives, Achinaam the Jezraelitess, and Abigaia the wife of Nabal the Carmelite,
and the men that were with him, every one and his family; and they dwelt in the cities of Chebron.
And the men of Judea come, and anoint David there to reign over the house of Juda; and they reported to David, saying, The men of Jabis of the country of Galaad have buried Saul.
And David sent messengers to the rulers of Jabis of the country of Galaad, and David said to them, Blessed be ye of the Lord, because ye have wrought this mercy toward your lord, even toward Saul the anointed of the Lord, and ye have buried him and Jonathan his son.
And now may the Lord deal in mercy and truth towards you: and I also will requite towards you this good deed, because ye have done this.
And now let your hands be made strong, and be valiant; for your master Saul is dead, and moreover the house of Juda have anointed me to be king over them.
But Abenner, the son of Ner, the commander-in-chief of Saul's army, took Jebosthe son of Saul, and brought him up from the camp to Manaem
and made him king over the land of Galaad, and over Thasiri, and over Jezrael, and over Ephraim, and over Benjamin, and over all Israel.
Jebosthe, Saul's son was forty years old, when he reigned over Israel; and he reigned two years, but not over the house of Juda, who followed David.
And the days which David reigned in Chebron over the house of Juda were seven years and six months.
And Abenner the son of Ner went forth, and the servants of Jebosthe the son of Saul, from Manaem to Gabaon.
And Joab the son of Saruia, and the servants of David, went forth from Chebron, and met them at the fountain of Gabaon, at the same place: and these sat down by the fountain on this side, and those by the fountain on that side.
And Abenner said to Joab, Let now the young men arise, and play before us. And Joab said, Let them arise.
And there arose and passed over by number twelve of the children of Benjamin, belonging to Jebosthe the son of Saul, and twelve of the servants of David.
And they seized every one the head of his neighbour with his hand, and his sword was thrust into the side of his neighbour, and they fall down together: and the name of that place was called The portion of the treacherous ones, which is in Gabaon.
And the battle was very severe on that day; and Abenner and the men of Israel were worsted before the servants of David.
And there were there the three sons of Saruia, Joab, and Abessa, and Asael: and Asael was swift in his feet as a roe in the field.
And Asael followed after Abenner, and turned not to go to the right hand or to the left from following Abenner.
And Abenner looked behind him, and said, Art thou Asael himself? and he said, I am.
And Abenner said to him, Turn thou to the right hand or to the left, and lay hold for thyself on one of the young men, and take to thyself his armour: but Asel would not turn back from following him.
And Abenner said yet again to Asael, Stand aloof from me, lest I smite thee to the ground? and how should I lift up my face to Joab?
And what does this mean? return to Joab thy brother? But he would not stand aloof; and Abenner smites him with the hinder end of the spear on the loins, and the spear went out behind him, and he falls there and dies on the spot: and it came to pass that every one that came to the place where Asael fell and died, stood still.
And Joab and Abessa pursued after Abenner, and the sun went down: and they went as far as the hill of Amman, which is in the front of Gai, by the desert way of Gabaon.
And the children of Benjamin who followed Abenner gather themselves together, and they formed themselves into one body, and stood on the top of a hill.
And Abenner called Joab, and said, Shall the sword devour perpetually? knowest thou not that it will be bitter at last? How long then wilt thou refuse to tell the people to turn from following our brethren?
And Joab said, As the Lord lives, if thou hadst not spoken, even from the morning the people had gone up every one from following his brother.
And Joab sounded the trumpet, and all the people departed, and did not pursue after Israel, and did not fight any longer.
And Abenner and his men departed at evening, and went all that night, and crossed over Jordan, and went along the whole adjacent country, and they come to the camp.
And Joab returned from following Abenner, and he assembled all the people, and there were missing of the people of David, nineteen men, and Asael.
And the servants of David smote of the children of Benjamin, of the men of Abenner, three hundred and sixty men belonging to him.
And they take up Asael, and bury him in the tomb of his father in Bethleem. And Joab and the men with him went all the night, and the morning rose upon them in Chebron.
Shout unto God, all the earth.
O sing praises to his name; give glory to his praise.
Say unto God, How awful are thy works! through the greatness of thy power thine enemies shall lie to thee.
Let all the earth worship thee, and sing to thee; let them sing to thy name. Pause.
Come and behold the works of God; he is terrible in his counsels beyond the children of men.
Who turns the sea into dry land; they shall go through the river on foot; there shall we rejoice in him,
who by his power is Lord over the age, his eyes look upon the nations; let not them that provoke him be exalted in themselves. Pause.
Bless our God, ye Gentiles, and make the voice of his praise to be heard;
who quickens my soul in life, and does not suffer my feet to be moved.
For thou, O God, has proved us; thou hast tried us with fire as silver is tried.
Thou broughtest us into the snare; thou laidest afflictions on our back.
Thou didst mount men upon our heads; we went through the fire and water; but thou broughtest us out into a place of refreshment.
I will go into thine house with whole-burnt-offerings; I will pay thee my vows,
which my lips framed, and my mouth uttered in my affliction.
I will offer to thee whole-burnt-sacrifices full of marrow, with incense and rams; I will sacrifice to thee oxen with goats. Pause.
Come, hear, and I will tell, all ye that fear God, how great things he has done for my soul.
I cried to him with my mouth, and exalted him with my tongue.
If I have regarded iniquity in my heart, let not the Lord hearken to me.
Therefore God has hearkened to me; he has attended to the voice of my prayer.
Blessed be God, who has not turned away my prayer, nor his mercy from me.
A labouring man that A is given to drunkenness shall not be rich: and he that contemneth small things shall fall by little and little.
Wine and women will make men of understanding to fall away: and he that cleaveth to harlots will become impudent.
Moths and worms shall have him to heritage, and a bold man shall be taken away.
He that is hasty to give credit is lightminded; and he that sinneth shall offend against his own soul.
Whoso taketh pleasure in wickedness shall be condemned: but he that resisteth pleasures crowneth his life.
He that can rule his tongue shall live without strife; and he that hateth babbling shall have less evil.
Rehearse not unto another that which is told unto thee, and thou shalt fare never the worse.
Whether it be to friend or foe, talk not of other men's lives; and if thou canst without offence, reveal them not.
For he heard and observed thee, and when time cometh he will hate thee.
If thou hast heard a word, let it die with thee; and be bold, it will not burst thee.
A fool travaileth with a word, as a woman in labour of a child.
As an arrow that sticketh in a man's thigh, so is a word within a fool's belly.
Admonish a friend, it may be he hath not done it: and if he have done it, that he do it no more.
Admonish thy friend, it may be he hath not said it: and if he have, that he speak it not again.
Admonish a friend: for many times it is a slander, and believe not every tale.
There is one that slippeth in his speech, but not from his heart; and who is he that hath not offended with his tongue?
Admonish thy neighbour before thou threaten him; and not being angry, give place to the law of the most High.
The fear of the Lord is all wisdom; and in all wisdom is the performance of the law, and the knowledge of his omnipotency.
The knowledge of wickedness is not wisdom, neither at any time the counsel of sinners prudence.
There is a wickedness, and the same an abomination; and there is a fool wanting in wisdom.
He that hath small understanding, and feareth God, is better than one that hath much wisdom, and transgresseth the law of the most High.
There is an exquisite subtilty, and the same is unjust; and there is one that turneth aside to make judgment appear; and there is a wise man that justifieth in judgment.
There is a wicked man that hangeth down his head sadly; but inwardly he is full of deceit,
Casting down his countenance, and making as if he heard not: where he is not known, he will do thee a mischief before thou be aware.
And if for want of power he be hindered from sinning, yet when he findeth opportunity he will do evil.
A man may be known by his look, and one that hath understanding by his countenance, when thou meetest him.
A man's attire, and excessive laughter, and gait, shew what he is.
THE WORD AGAINST THE LAND OF MOAB. By night the land of Moab shall be destroyed; for by night the wall of the land of Moab shall be destroyed.
Grieve for yourselves; for even Debon, where your altar is, shall be destroyed: thither shall ye go up to weep, over Nabau of the land of Moab: howl ye: baldness shall be on every head, and all arms shall be wounded.
Gird yourselves with sackcloth in her streets: and lament upon her roofs, and in her streets, and in her ways; howl all of you with weeping.
For Esebon and Eleale have cried: their voice was heard to Jassa: therefore the loins of the region of Moab cry aloud; her soul shall know.
The heart of the region of Moab cries within her to Segor; for it is as a heifer of three years old: and on the ascent of Luith they shall go up to thee weeping by the way of Aroniim: she cries, Destruction, and trembling.
The water of Nemerim shall be desolate, and the grass thereof shall fail: for there shall be no green grass.
Shall Moab even thus be delivered? for I will bring the Arabians upon the valley, and they shall take it.
For the cry has reached the border of the region of Moab, even of Agalim; and her howling has gone as far as the well of Aelim.
And the water of Dimon shall be filled with blood: for I will bring Arabians upon Dimon, and I will take away the seed of Moab, and Ariel, and the remnant of Adama.
I lifted up mine eyes to the mountains, whence my help shall come.
My help shall come from the Lord, who made the heaven and the earth.
Let not thy foot be moved; and let not thy keeper slumber.
Behold, he that keeps Israel shall not slumber nor sleep.
The Lord shall keep thee: the Lord is thy shelter upon thy right hand.
The sun shall not burn thee by day, neither the moon by night.
May the Lord preserve thee from all evil: the Lord shall keep thy soul.
The Lord shall keep thy coming in, and thy going out, from henceforth and even for ever.
A fair name is better than much wealth, and good favour is above silver and gold.
The rich and the poor meet together; but the Lord made them both.
An intelligent man seeing a bad man severely punished is himself instructed, but fools pass by and are punished.
The fear of the Lord is the offspring of wisdom, and wealth, and glory, and life.
Thistles and snares are in perverse ways; but he that keeps his soul will refrain from them.
The rich will rule over the poor, and servants will lend to their own masters.
He that sows wickedness shall reap troubles; and shall fully receive the punishment of his deeds. God loves a cheerful and liberal man; but a man shall fully prove the folly of his works.
He that has pity on the poor shall himself be maintained; for he has given of his own bread to the poor. He that gives liberally secures victory an honour; but he takes away the life of them that posses them.
Cast out a pestilent person from the council, and strife shall go out with him; for when he sits in the council he dishonours all.
The Lord loves holy hearts, and all blameless persons are acceptable with him: a king rules with his lips.
But the eyes of the Lord preserve discretion; but the transgressor despises wise words.
The sluggard makes excuses, and says, There is a lion in the ways, and murderers in the streets.
The mouth of a transgressor is a deep pit; and he that is hated of the Lord shall fall into it. Evil ways are before a man, and he does not like to turn away from them; but it is needful to turn aside from a perverse and bad way.
Folly is attached to the heart of a child, but the rod and instruction are then far from him.
He that oppresses the poor, increases his own substance, yet gives to the rich so as to make it less.
Incline thine ear to the words of wise men: hear also my word, and apply thine heart,
that thou mayest know that they are good: and if thou lay them to heart, they shall also gladden thee on thy lips.
That thy hope may be in the Lord, and he may make thy way known to thee.
And do thou too repeatedly record them for thyself on the table of thine heart, for counsel and knowledge.
I therefore teach thee truth, and knowledge good to hear; that thou mayest answer words of truth to them that question thee.
Do no violence to the poor, for he is needy: neither dishonour the helpless man in the gates.
For the Lord will plead his cause, and thou shalt deliver thy soul in safety.
Be not companion to a furious man; neither lodge with a passionate man:
lest thou learn of his ways, and get snares to thy soul.
Become not surety from respect of a man's person.
For if those have not whence to give compensation, they will take the bed that is under thee.
Remove not the old landmarks, which thy fathers placed.
It is fit that an observant man and one diligent in his business should attend on kings, and not attend on slothful men.
Then Job answered and said,
How long will ye vex my soul, and destroy me with words? only know that the Lord has dealt with me thus.
Ye speak against me; ye do not feel for me, but bear hard upon me.
Yea verily, I have erred in truth, (but the error abides with myself) in having spoken words which it was not right to speak; and my words err, and are unreasonable.
But alas! for ye magnify yourselves against me, and insult me with reproach.
Know then that it is the Lord that has troubled me, and has raised his bulwark against me.
Behold, I laugh at reproach; I will not speak: or I will cry out, but there is nowhere judgment.
I am fenced round about, and can by no means escape: he has set darkness before my face.
And he has stripped me of my glory, and has taken the crown from my head.
He has torn me around about, and I am gone: and he has cut off my hope like a tree.
And he has dreadfully handled me in anger, and has counted me for an enemy.
His troops also came upon me with one accord, liars in wait compassed my ways.
My brethren have stood aloof from me; they have recognized strangers rather than me: and my friends have become pitiless.
My nearest of kin have not acknowledged me, and they that knew my name, have forgotten me.
As for my household, and my maid-servants, I was a stranger before them.
I called my servant, and he hearkened not; and my mouth intreated him.
And I besought my wife, and earnestly intreated the sons of my concubines.
But they rejected me for ever; whenever I rise up, they speak against me.
They that saw me abhorred me: the very persons whom I had loved, rose up against me.
My flesh is corrupt under my skin, and my bones are held in my teeth.
Pity me, pity me, O friends; for it is the hand of the Lord that has touched me.
Wherefore do ye persecute me as also the Lord does, and are not satisfied with my flesh?
For oh that my words were written, and that they were recorded in a book forever,
with an iron pen and lead, or graven in the rocks!
For I know that he is eternal who is about to deliver me,
and to raise up upon the earth my skin that endures these sufferings: for these things have been accomplished to me of the Lord;
which I am conscious of in myself, which mine eye has seen, and not another, but all have been fulfilled to me in my bosom.
But if ye shall also say, What shall we say before him, and so find the root of the matter in him?
Do ye also beware of deceit: for wrath will come upon transgressors; and then shall they know where their substance is.
And if there arise within thee a prophet, or one who dreams a dream, and he gives thee a sign or a wonder,
and the sign or the wonder come to pass which he spoke to thee, saying, Let us go and serve other gods, which ye know not;
ye shall not hearken to the words of that prophet, or the dreamer of that dream, because the Lord thy God tries you, to know whether ye love your God with all your heart and with all your soul.
Ye shall follow the Lord your God, and fear him, and ye shall hear his voice, and attach yourselves to him.
And that prophet or that dreamer of a dream, shall die; for he has spoken to make thee err from the Lord thy God who brought thee out of the land of Egypt, who redeemed thee from bondage, to thrust thee out of the way which the Lord thy God commanded thee to walk in: so shalt thou abolish the evil from among you.
And if thy brother by thy father or mother, or thy son, or daughter, or thy wife in thy bosom, or friend who is equal to thine own soul, entreat thee secretly, saying, Let us go and serve other gods, which neither thou nor thy fathers have known,
of the gods of the nations that are round about you, who are near thee or at a distance from thee, from one end of the earth to the other;
thou shalt not consent to him, neither shalt thou hearken to him; and thine eye shall not spare him, thou shalt feel no regret for him, neither shalt thou at all protect him:
thou shalt surely report concerning him, and thy hands shall be upon him among the first to slay him, and the hands of all the people at the last.
And they shall stone him with stones, and he shall die, because he sought to draw thee away from the Lord thy God who brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.
And all Israel shall hear, and fear, and shall not again do according to this evil thing among you.
And if in one of thy cities which the Lord God gives thee to dwell therein, thou shalt hear men saying,
Evil men have gone out from you, and have caused all the inhabitants of their land to fall away, saying, Let us go and worship other gods, whom ye knew not,
then thou shalt enquire and ask, and search diligently, and behold, if the thing is clearly true, and this abomination has taken place among you,
thou shalt utterly destroy all the dwellers in that land with the edge of the sword; ye shall solemnly curse it, and all things in it.
And all its spoils thou shalt gather into its public ways, and thou shalt burn the city with fire, and all its spoils publicly before the Lord thy God; and it shall be uninhabited for ever, it shall not be built again.
And there shall nothing of the cursed thing cleave to thy hand, that the Lord may turn from his fierce anger, and shew thee mercy, and pity thee, and multiply thee, as he sware to thy fathers;
if thou wilt hear the voice of the Lord thy God, to keep his commandments, all that I charge thee this day, to do that which is good and pleasing before the Lord thy God.
At that time Marodach Baladan, the son of Baladan, the king of Babylonia, sent letters and ambassadors and gifts to Ezekias: for he had heard that he had been sick even to death, and was recovered.
And Ezekias was glad of their coming, and he shewed them the house of his spices, and of silver, and gold, and myrrh, and incense, and ointment, and all the houses of his treasures, and all that he had in his stores: and there was nothing in his house, nor in all his dominion, which Ezekias did not shew.
And Esaias the prophet came to king Ezekias, and said to him, What say these men? and whence came they to thee? and Ezekias said, They are come to me from a land afar off, from Babylon.
And Esaias said, What have they seen in thine house? and Ezekias said, They have seen everything in my house; and there is nothing in my house which they have not seen: yea, also the possessions in my treasuries.
And Esaias said to him, Hear the word of the Lord of hosts:
Behold, the days come, when they shall take all the things that are in thine house, and all that thy fathers have gathered until this day, shall go to Babylon; and they shall not leave anything at all: and God hath said,
that they shall take also of thy children whom thou shalt beget; and they shall make them eunuchs in the house of the king of the Babylonians.
And Ezekias said to Esaias, Good is the word of the Lord, which he hath spoken: let there, I pray, be peace and righteousness in my days.
Woe to the shepherds that destroy and scatter the sheep of their pasture!
Therefore thus saith the Lord against them that tend my people; Ye have scattered my sheep, and driven them out, and ye have not visited them: behold, I will take vengeance upon you according to your evil practices.
And I will gather in the remnant of my people in every land, whither I have driven them out, and will set them in their pasture; and they shall increase and be multiplied.
And I will raise up shepherds to them, who shall feed them: and they shall fear no more, nor be alarmed, saith the Lord.
Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, when I will raise up to David a righteous branch, and a king shall reign and understand, and shall execute judgment and righteousness on the earth.
In his days both Juda shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell securely: and this is his name, which the Lord shall call him, Josedec among the prophets.
My heart is broken within me; all my bones are shaken: I am become as a broken-down man, and as a man overcome with wine, because of the Lord, and because of the excellence of his glory.
For because of these things the land mourns; the pastures of the wilderness are dried up; and their course is become evil, and so also their strength.
Also in the prophets of Jerusalem I have seen horrible things: as they committed adultery, and walked in lies, and strengthened the hands of many, that they should not return each from his evil way: they are all become to me as Sodom, and the inhabitants thereof as Gomorrha.
Behold, there is an earthquake from the Lord, and anger proceeds to a convulsion, it shall come violently upon the ungodly.
And the Lord's wrath shall return no more, until he have accomplished it, and until he have established it, according to the purpose of his heart: at the end of the days they shall understand it.
I sent not the prophets, yet they ran: neither spoke I to them, yet they prophesied.
But if they had stood in my counsel, and if they had hearkened to my words, then would they have turned my people from their evil practices.
I am a God nigh at hand, saith the Lord, and not a God afar off.
Shall any one hide himself in secret places, and I not see him? Do I not fill heaven and earth? saith the Lord.
I have heard what the prophets say, what they prophesy in my name, saying falsely, I have seen a night vision.
who devise that men may forget my law by their dreams, which they have told every one to his neighbour, as their fathers forgot my name in the worship of Baal.
The prophet who has a dream, let him tell his dream; and he in whom is my word spoken to him, let him tell my word truly: what is the chaff to the corn? so are my words, saith the Lord.
Behold, are not my words as fire? saith the Lord; and as an axe cutting the rock?
Behold, I am therefore against the prophets, saith the Lord God, that steal my words every one from his neighbour.
And if this people, or the priest, or the prophet, should ask, What is the burden of the Lord? then thou shalt say to them, Ye are the burden, and I will dash you down, saith the Lord.
The God of gods, the Lord, has spoken, and called the earth from the rising of the sun to the going down thereof.
Out of Sion comes the excellence of his beauty.
God, our God, shall come manifestly, and shall not keep silence: a fire shall be kindled before him, and round about him there shall be a very great tempest.
He shall summon the heaven above, and the earth, that he may judge his people.
Assemble ye his saints to him, those that have engaged in a covenant with him upon sacrifices.
And the heavens shall declare his righteousness: for God is judge. Pause.
Hear, my people, and I will speak to thee, O Israel: and I will testify to thee: I am God, thy God.
I will not reprove thee on account of thy sacrifices; for thy whole-burnt-offerings are before me continually.
I will take no bullocks out of thine house, nor he-goats out of thy flocks.
For all the wild beasts of the thicket are mine, the cattle on the mountains, and oxen.
I know all the birds of the sky; and the beauty of the field is mine.
If I should be hungry, I will not tell thee: for the world is mine, and the fullness of it.
Will I eat the flesh of bulls, or drink the blood of goats?
Offer to God the sacrifice of praise; and pay thy vows to the Most High.
And call upon me in the day of affliction; and I will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify me. Pause.
But to the sinner God has said, Why dost thou declare my ordinances, and take up my covenant in thy mouth?
Whereas thou hast hated instruction, and hast cast my words behind thee.
If thou sawest a thief, thou rannest along with him, and hast cast in thy lot with adulterers.
Thy mouth has multiplied wickedness, and thy tongue has framed deceit.
Thou didst sit and speak against thy brother, and didst scandalize thy mother's son.
These things thou didst, and I kept silence: thou thoughtest wickedly that I should be like thee, but I will reprove thee, and set thine offences before thee.
Now consider these things, ye that forget God, lest he rend you, and there is no deliverer.
The sacrifice of praise will glorify me: and that is the way wherein I will shew to him the salvation of God.
I would that thou, O my kinsman, wert he that sucked the breasts of my mother; when I found thee without, I would kiss thee; yea, they should not despise me.
I would take thee, I would bring thee into my mother's house, and into the chamber of her that conceived me; I would make thee to drink of spiced wine, of the juice of my pomegranates.
His left hand should be under my head, and his right hand should embrace me.
I have charged you, ye daughters of Jerusalem, by the virtues of the field, that ye stir not up, nor awake my love, until he please.
Who is this that comes up all white, leaning on her kinsman? I raised thee up under an apple-tree; there thy mother brought thee forth; there she that bore thee brought thee forth.
Set me as a seal upon thy heart, as a seal upon thine arm; for love is strong as death; jealousy is cruel as the grave, her shafts are shafts of fire, even the flames thereof.
Much water will not be able to quench love, and rivers shall not drown it; if a man would give all his substance for love, men would utterly despise it.
Our sister is little, and has no breasts; what shall we do for our sister, in the day wherein she shall be spoken for?
If she is a wall, let us build upon her silver bulwarks; and if she is a door, let us carve for her cedar panels.
I am a wall, and my breasts are as towers; I was in their eyes as one that found peace.
Solomon had a vineyard in Beelamon; he let his vineyard to keepers; every one was to bring for its fruit a thousand pieces of silver.
My vineyard, even mine, is before me; Solomon shall have a thousand, and they that keep its fruit two hundred.
Thou that dwellest in the gardens, the companions hearken to thy voice: make me hear it.
Away, my kinsman, and be like a doe or a fawn on the mountains of spices.
And Moses called all Israel, and said to them, Hear, Israel, the ordinances and judgments, all that I speak in your ears this day, and ye shall learn them, and observe to do them.
The Lord your God made a covenant with you in Choreb.
The Lord did not make this covenant with your fathers, but with you: ye are all here alive this day.
The Lord spoke to you face to face in the mountain out of the midst of the fire.
And I stood between the Lord and you at that time to report to you the words of the Lord, (because ye were afraid before the fire, and ye went not up to the mountain) saying,
I am the Lord thy God, who brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.
Thou shalt have no other gods before my face.
Thou shalt not make to thyself an image, nor likeness of any thing, whatever things are in the heaven above, and whatever are in the earth beneath, and whatever are in the waters under the earth.
Thou shalt not bow down to them, nor shalt thou serve them; for I am the Lord thy God, a jealous God, visiting the sins of the fathers upon the children to the third and fourth generation to them that hate me,
and doing mercifully to thousands of them that love me, and that keep my commandments.
Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord thy God will certainly not acquit him that takes his name in vain.
Keep the sabbath day to sanctify it, as the Lord thy God commanded thee.
Six days thou shalt work, and thou shalt do all thy works;
but on the seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord thy God: thou shalt do in it no work, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, thy man-servant, and thy maid-servant, thine ox, and thine ass, and all thy cattle, and the stranger that sojourns in the midst of thee; that thy man-servant may rest, and thy maid, and thine ox, as well as thou.
And thou shalt remember that thou wast a slave in the land of Egypt, and the Lord thy God brought thee out thence with a mighty hand, and a high arm: therefore the Lord appointed thee to keep the sabbath day and to sanctify it.
Honour thy father and thy mother, as the Lord thy God commanded thee; that it may be well with thee, and that thou mayest live long upon the land, which the Lord thy God gives thee.
Thou shalt not commit murder.
Thou shalt not commit adultery.
Thou shalt not steal.
Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour.
Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's wife; thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's house, nor his field, nor his man-servant, nor his maid, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any beast of his, nor any thing that is thy neighbour's.
These words the Lord spoke to all the assembly of you in the mountain out of the midst of the firethere was darkness, blackness, storm, a loud voiceand he added no more, and he wrote them on two tables of stone, and he gave them to me.
And it came to pass when ye heard the voice out of the midst of the fire, for the mountain burned with fire, that ye came to me, even all the heads of your tribes, and your elders:
and ye said, Behold, the Lord our God has shewn us his glory, and we have heard his voice out of the midst of the fire: this day we have seen that God shall speak to man, and he shall live.
And now let us not die, for this great fire will consume us, if we shall hear the voice of the Lord our God any more, and we shall die.
For what flesh is there which has heard the voice of the living God, speaking out of the midst of the fire, as we have heard, and shall live?
Do thou draw near, and hear all that the Lord our God shall say, and thou shalt speak to us all things whatsoever the Lord our God shall speak to thee, and we will hear, and do.
And the Lord heard the voice of your words as ye spoke to me; and the Lord said to me, I have heard the voice of the words of this people, even all things that they have said to thee. They have well said all that they have spoken.
O that there were such a heart in them, that they should fear me and keep my commands always, that it might be well with them and with their sons for ever.
Go, say to them, Return ye to your houses;
but stand thou here with me, and I will tell thee all the commands, and the ordinances, and the judgments, which thou shalt teach them, and let them do so in the land which I give them for an inheritance.
And ye shall take heed to do as the Lord thy God commanded thee; ye shall not turn aside to the right hand or to the left,
according to all the way which the Lord thy God commanded thee to walk in it, that he may give thee rest; and that it may be well with thee, and ye may prolong your days on the land which ye shall inherit.
O Lord, Father and Governor of all my whole life, leave me not to their counsels, and let me not fall by them.
Who will set scourges over my thoughts, and the discipline of wisdom over mine heart? that they spare me not for mine ignorances, and it pass not by my sins:
Lest mine ignorances increase, and my sins abound to my destruction, and I fall before mine adversaries, and mine enemy rejoice over me, whose hope is far from thy mercy.
O Lord, Father and God of my life, give me not a proud look, but turn away from thy servants always a haughty mind.
Turn away from me vain hopes and concupiscence, and thou shalt hold him up that is desirous always to serve thee.
Let not the greediness of the belly nor lust of the flesh take hold of me; and give not over me thy servant into an impudent mind.
Hear, O ye children, the discipline of the mouth: he that keepeth it shall never be taken in his lips.
The sinner shall be left in his foolishness: both the evil speaker and the proud shall fall thereby.
Accustom not thy mouth to swearing; neither use thyself to the naming of the Holy One.
For as a servant that is continually beaten shall not be without a blue mark: so he that sweareth and nameth God continually shall not be faultless.
A man that useth much swearing shall be filled with iniquity, and the plague shall never depart from his house: if he shall offend, his sin shall be upon him: and if he acknowledge not his sin, he maketh a double offence: and if he swear in vain, he shall not be innocent, but his house shall be full of calamities.
There is a word that is clothed about with death: God grant that it be not found in the heritage of Jacob; for all such things shall be far from the godly, and they shall not wallow in their sins.
Use not thy mouth to intemperate swearing, for therein is the word of sin.
Remember thy father and thy mother, when thou sittest among great men. Be not forgetful before them, and so thou by thy custom become a fool, and wish that thou hadst not been born, and curse they day of thy nativity.
The man that is accustomed to opprobrious words will never be reformed all the days of his life.
Two sorts of men multiply sin, and the third will bring wrath: a hot mind is as a burning fire, it will never be quenched till it be consumed: a fornicator in the body of his flesh will never cease till he hath kindled a fire.
All bread is sweet to a whoremonger, he will not leave off till he die.
A man that breaketh wedlock, saying thus in his heart, Who seeth me? I am compassed about with darkness, the walls cover me, and no body seeth me; what need I to fear? the most High will not remember my sins:
Such a man only feareth the eyes of men, and knoweth not that the eyes of the Lord are ten thousand times brighter than the sun, beholding all the ways of men, and considering the most secret parts.
He knew all things ere ever they were created; so also after they were perfected he looked upon them all.
This man shall be punished in the streets of the city, and where he suspecteth not he shall be taken.
Thus shall it go also with the wife that leaveth her husband, and bringeth in an heir by another.
For first, she hath disobeyed the law of the most High; and secondly, she hath trespassed against her own husband; and thirdly, she hath played the whore in adultery, and brought children by another man.
She shall be brought out into the congregation, and inquisition shall be made of her children.
Her children shall not take root, and her branches shall bring forth no fruit.
She shall leave her memory to be cursed, and her reproach shall not be blotted out.
And they that remain shall know that there is nothing better than the fear of the Lord, and that there is nothing sweeter than to take heed unto the commandments of the Lord.
The vision of Obdias. Thus saith the Lord God to Idumea; I have heard a report from the Lord, and he has sent forth a message to the nations.
Arise ye, and let us rise up against her to war.
Behold, I have made thee small among the Gentiles: thou art greatly dishonoured. The pride of thine heart has elated thee, dwelling as thou dost in the holes of the rocks, as one that exalts his habitation, saying in his heart, Who will bring me down to the ground?
If thou shouldest mount up as the eagle, and if thou shouldest make thy nest among the stars, thence will I bring thee down, saith the Lord.
If thieves came in to thee, or robbers by night, where wouldest thou have been cast away? would they not have stolen just enough for themselves? and if grape-gatherers went in to thee, would they not leave a gleaning?
How has Esau been searched out, and how have his hidden things been detected?
They sent thee to thy coasts: all the men of thy covenant have withstood thee; thine allies have prevailed against thee, they have set snares under thee: they have no understanding.
In that day, saith the Lord, I will destroy the wise men out of Idumea, and understanding out of the mount of Esau.
And thy warriors from Thaeman shall be dismayed, to the end that man may be cut off from the mount of Esau.
Because of the slaughter and the sin committed against thy brother Jacob, shame shall cover thee, and thou shalt be cut off for ever.
From the day that thou stoodest in opposition to him, in the days when foreigners were taking captive his forces, and strangers entered into his gates, and cast lots on Jerusalem, thou also wast as one of them.
And thou shouldest not have looked on the day of thy brother in the day of strangers; nor shouldest thou have rejoiced against the children of Juda in the day of their destruction; neither shouldest thou have boasted in the day of their affliction.
Neither shouldest thou have gone into the gates of the people in the day of their troubles; nor yet shouldest thou have looked upon their gathering in the day of their destruction, nor shouldest thou have attacked their host in the day of their perishing.
Neither shouldest thou have stood at the opening of their passages, to destroy utterly those of them that were escaping; neither shouldest thou have shut up his fugitives in the day of affliction.
For the day of the Lord is near upon all the Gentiles: as thou have done, so shall it be done to thee: thy recompense shall be returned on thine own head.
For as thou hast drunk upon my holy mountain, so shall all the nations drink wine; they shall drink, and go down, and be as if they were not.
But on mount Sion there shall be deliverance, and there shall be a sanctuary; and the house of Jacob shall take for an inheritance those that took them for an inheritance.
And the house of Jacob shall be fire, and the house of Joseph a flame, and the house of Esau shall be for stubble; and Israel shall flame forth against them, and shall devour them, and there shall not be a corn-field left to the house of Esau; because the Lord has spoken.
Hear ye this word, ye heifers of the land of Basan that are in the mountain of Samaria, that oppress the poor, and trample on the needy, which say to their masters, Give us that we may drink.
The Lord swears by his holiness, that, behold, the days come upon you, when they shall take you with weapons, and fiery destroyers shall cast those with you into boiling caldrons.
And ye shall be brought forth naked in the presence of each other; and ye shall be cast forth on the mountain Romman, saith the Lord.
Ye went into Bethel, and sinned, and ye multiplied sin at Galgala; and ye brought your meat-offerings in the morning, and your tithes every third day.
And they read the law without, and called for public professions: proclaim aloud that the children of Israel have loved these things, saith the Lord.
And I will give you dullness of teeth in all your cities, and want of bread in all your places: yet ye returned not to me, saith the Lord.
Also I withheld from you the rain three months before the harvest: and I will rain upon one city, and on another city I will not rain: one part shall be rained upon, and the part on which I shall not rain shall be dried up.
And the inhabitants of two or three cities shall be gathered to one city to drink water, and they shall not be satisfied: yet ye have not returned to me, saith the Lord.
I smote you with parching, and with blight: ye multiplied your gardens, your vineyards, and your fig-grounds, and the cankerworm devoured your olive-yards: yet not even thus did ye return to me, saith the Lord.
O Lord, our Lord, how wonderful is thy name in all the earth! for thy magnificence is exalted above the heavens.
Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings hast thou perfected praise, because of thine enemies; that thou mightest put down the enemy and avenger.
For I will regard the heavens, the work of thy fingers; the moon and stars, which thou hast established.
What is man, that thou art mindful of him? or the son of man, that thou visitest him?
Thou madest him a little less than angels, thou hast crowned him with glory and honour;
and thou hast set him over the works of thy hands: thou hast put all things under his feet:
sheep and all oxen, yea and the cattle of the field;
the birds of the sky, and the fish of the sea, the creatures passing through the paths of the sea.
O Lord our Lord, how wonderful is thy name in all the earth!
I will give thanks to thee, O Lord, with my whole heart; I will recount all thy wonderful works.
I will be glad and exult in thee: I will sing to thy name, O thou Most High.
When mine enemies are turned back, they shall be feeble and perish at thy presence.
For thou hast maintained my cause and my right; thou satest on the throne, that judgest righteousness.
Thou hast rebuked the nations, and the ungodly one has perished; thou hast blotted out their name for ever, even for ever and ever.
The swords of the enemy have failed utterly; and thou hast destroyed cities: their memorial has been destroyed with a noise,
but the Lord endures for ever: he has prepared his throne for judgment.
And he will judge the world in righteousness, he will judge the nations in uprightness.
The Lord also is become a refuge for the poor, a seasonable help, in affliction.
And let them that know thy name hope in thee: for thou, O Lord, hast not failed them that diligently seek thee.
Sing praises to the Lord, who dwells in Sion: declare his dealings among the nations.
For he remembered them, in making inquisition for blood: he has not forgotten the supplication of the poor.
Have mercy upon me, O Lord; look upon my affliction which I suffer of mine enemies, thou that liftest me up from the gates of death:
that I may declare all thy praises in the gates of the daughter of Sion: I will exult in thy salvation.
The heathen are caught in the destruction which they planned: in the very snare which they hid is their foot taken.
The Lord is known as executing judgments: the sinner is taken in the works of his hands. A song of Pause.
Let sinners be driven away into Hades, even all the nations that forget God.
For the poor shall not be forgotten for ever: the patience of the needy ones shall not perish for ever.
Arise, O Lord, let not man prevail: let the heathen be judged before thee.
Appoint, O Lord, a lawgiver over them: let the heathen know that they are men. Pause.
Why standest thou afar off, O Lord? why dost thou overlook us in times of need, in affliction?
While the ungodly one acts proudly, the poor is hotly pursued: the wicked are taken in the crafty counsels which they imagine.
Because the sinner praises himself for the desires of his heart; and the unjust one blesses himself.
The sinner has provoked the Lord: according to the abundance of his pride he will not seek after him: God is not before him.
His ways are profane at all times; thy judgments are removed from before him: he will gain the mastery over all his enemies.
For he has said in his heart, I shall not be moved, continuing without evil from generation to generation.
Whose mouth is full of cursing, and bitterness, and fraud: under his tongue are trouble and pain.
He lies in wait with rich men in secret places, in order to slay the innocent: his eyes are set against the poor.
He lies in wait in secret as a lion in his den: he lies in wait to ravish the poor, to ravish the poor when he draws him after him: he will bring him down in his snare.
He will bow down and fall when he has mastered the poor.
For he has said in his heart, God has forgotten: he has turned away his face so as never to look.
Arise, O Lord God; let thy hand be lifted up: forget not the poor.
Wherefore, has the wicked provoked God? for he has said in his heart, He will not require it.
Thou seest it; for thou dost observe trouble and wrath, to deliver them into thy hands: the poor has been left to thee; thou wast a helper to the orphan.
Break thou the arm of the sinner and wicked man: his sin shall be sought for, and shall not be found.
The Lord shall reign for ever, even for ever and ever: ye Gentiles shall perish out his land.
The Lord has heard the desire of the poor: thine ear has inclined to the preparation of their heart;
to plead for the orphan and afflicted, that man may no more boast upon the earth.
And now, Israel, hear the ordinances and judgments, all that I teach you this day to do: that ye may live, and be multiplied, and that ye may go in and inherit the land, which the Lord God of your fathers gives you.
Ye shall not add to the word which I command you, and ye shall not take from it: keep the commandments of the Lord our God, all that I command you this day.
Your eyes have seen all that the Lord our God did in the case of Beel-phegor; for every man that went after Beel-phegor, the Lord your God has utterly destroyed him from among you.
But ye that kept close to the Lord your God are all alive to-day.
Behold, I have shewn you ordinances and judgments as the Lord commanded me, that ye should do so in the land into which ye go to inherit it.
And ye shall keep and do them: for this is your wisdom and understanding before all nations, as many as shall hear all these ordinances; and they shall say, Behold, this great nation is a wise and understanding people.
For what manner of nation is so great, which has God so near to them as the Lord our God is in all things in whatsoever we may call upon him?
And what manner of nation is so great, which has righteous ordinances and judgments according to all this law, which I set before you this day?
Take heed to thyself, and keep thy heart diligently: forget not any of the things, which thine eyes have seen, and let them not depart from thine heart all the days of thy life; and thou shalt teach thy sons and thy sons' sons,
even the things that happened in the day in which ye stood before the Lord our God in Choreb in the day of the assembly; for the Lord said to me, Gather the people to me, and let them hear my words, that they may learn to fear me all the days which they live upon the earth, and they shall teach their sons.
And ye drew nigh and stood under the mountain; and the mountain burned with fire up to heaven: there was darkness, blackness, and tempest.
And the Lord spoke to you out of the midst of the fire a voice of words, which ye heard: and ye saw no likeness, only ye heard a voice.
And he announced to you his covenant, which he commanded you to keep, even the ten commandments; and he wrote them on two tables of stone.
And the Lord commanded me at that time, to teach you ordinances and judgments, that ye should do them on the land, into which ye go to inherit it.
And take good heed to your hearts, for ye saw no similitude in the day in which the Lord spoke to you in Choreb in the mountain out of the midst of the fire:
lest ye transgress, and make to yourselves a carved image, any kind of figure, the likeness of male or female,
the likeness of any beast of those that are on the earth, the likeness of any winged bird which flies under heaven,
the likeness of any reptile which creeps on the earth, the likeness of any fish of those which are in the waters under the earth;
and lest having looked up to the sky, and having seen the sun and the moon and the stars, and all the heavenly bodies, thou shouldest go astray and worship them, and serve them, which the Lord thy God has distributed to all the nations under heaven.
But God took you, and led you forth out of the land of Egypt, out of the iron furnace, out of Egypt, to be to him a people of inheritance, as at this day.
And the Lord God was angry with me for the things said by you, and sware that I should not go over this Jordan, and that I should not enter into the land, which the Lord thy God giveth thee for an inheritance.
For I am to die in this land, and shall not pass over this Jordan; but ye are to pass over, and shall inherit this good land.
Take heed to yourselves, lest ye forget the covenant of the Lord our God, which he made with you, and ye transgress, and make to yourselves a graven image of any of the things concerning which the Lord thy God commanded thee.
For the Lord thy God is a consuming fire, a jealous God.
And when thou shalt have begotten sons, and shalt have sons' sons, and ye shall have dwelt a long time on the land, and shall have transgressed, and made a graven image of any thing, and shall have done wickedly before the Lord your God to provoke him;
I call heaven and earth this day to witness against you, that ye shall surely perish from off the land, into which ye go across Jordan to inherit it there; ye shall not prolong your days upon it, but shall be utterly cut off.
And the Lord shall scatter you among all nations, and ye shall be left few in number among all the nations, among which the Lord shall bring you.
And ye shall there serve other gods, the works of the hands of men, wood and stones, which cannot see, nor can they hear, nor eat, nor smell.
And there ye shall seek the Lord your God, and ye shall find him whenever ye shall seek him with all your heart, and with all your soul in your affliction.
And all these things shall come upon thee in the last days, and thou shalt turn to the Lord thy God, and shalt hearken to his voice.
Because the Lord thy God is a God of pity: he will not forsake thee, nor destroy thee; he will not forget the covenant of thy fathers, which the Lord sware to them.
Ask of the former days which were before thee, from the day when God created man upon the earth, and beginning at the one end of heaven to the other end of heaven, if there has happened any thing like to this great event, if such a thing has been heard:
if a nation have heard the voice of the living God speaking out of the midst of the fire, as thou hast heard and hast lived;
if God has assayed to go and take to himself a nation out of the midst of another nation with trial, and with signs, and with wonders, and with war, and with a mighty hand, and with a high arm, and with great sights, according to all the things which the Lord our God did in Egypt in thy sight.
So that thou shouldest know that the Lord thy God he is God, and there is none beside him.
His voice was made audible from heaven to instruct thee, and he shewed thee upon the earth his great fire, and thou heardest his words out of the midst of the fire.
Because he loved thy fathers, he also chose you their seed after them, and he brought thee himself with his great strength out of Egypt,
to destroy nations great and stronger than thou before thy face, to bring thee in, to give thee their land to inherit, as thou hast it this day.
An thou shalt know this day, and shalt consider in thine heart, that the Lord thy God he is God in heaven above, and on the earth beneath, and there is none else but he.
And keep ye his commandments, and his ordinances, all that I command you this day; that it may be well with thee, and with thy sons after thee, that ye may be long-lived upon the earth, which the Lord thy God giveth thee for ever.
Then Moses separated three cities beyond Jordan on the east,
that the slayer might flee thither, who should have slain his neighbour unintentionally, and should not have hated him in times past, and he shall flee to one of these cities and live:
Bosor in the wilderness, in the plain country of Ruben, and Ramoth in Galaad belonging to Gad, and Gaulon in Basan belonging to Manasse.
This is the law which Moses set before the children of Israel.
These are the testimonies, and the ordinances, and the judgments, which Moses spoke to the sons of Israel, when they came out of the land of Egypt:
on the other side of Jordan, in the valley near the house of Phogor, in the land of Seon king of the Amorites, who dwelt in Esebon, whom Moses and the sons of Israel smote when they came out of the land of Egypt.
And they inherited his land, and the land of Og king of Basan, two kings of the Amorites, who were beyond Jordan eastward.
From Aroer, which is on the border of the brook Arnon, even to the mount of Seon, which is Aermon.
All Araba beyond Jordan eastward under Asedoth hewn in the rock.
Thus said the Lord; Make to thyself bonds and yokes, and put them about thy neck,
and thou shalt send them to the king of Idumea, and to the king of Moab, and to the king of the children of Ammon, and to the king of Tyre, and to the king of Sidon, by the hands of their messengers that come to meet them at Jerusalem to Sedekias king of Juda.
And thou shalt commission them to say to their lords, Thus said the Lord God of Israel; Thus shall ye say to your lords;
A slothful man is compared to a filthy stone, and every one will hiss him out to his disgrace.
A slothful man is compared to the filth of a dunghill: every man that takes it up will shake his hand.
An evilnurtured man is the dishonour of his father that begat him: and a foolish daughter is born to his loss.
A wise daughter shall bring an inheritance to her husband: but she that liveth dishonestly is her father's heaviness.
She that is bold dishonoureth both her father and her husband, but they both shall despise her.
A tale out of season is as musick in mourning: but stripes and correction of wisdom are never out of time.
If children live honestly, and have wherewithal, they shall cover the baseness of their parents.
But children, being haughty, through disdain and want of nurture do stain the nobility of their kindred.
Weep for the dead, for he hath lost the light: and weep for the fool, for he wanteth understanding: make little weeping for the dead, for he is at rest: but the life of the fool is worse than death.
Seven days do men mourn for him that is dead; but for a fool and an ungodly man all the days of his life.
Talk not much with a fool, and go not to him that hath no understanding: beware of him, lest thou have trouble, and thou shalt never be defiled with his fooleries: depart from him, and thou shalt find rest, and never be disquieted with madness.
What is heavier than lead? and what is the name thereof, but a fool?
Sand, and salt, and a mass of iron, is easier to bear, than a man without understanding.
As timber girt and bound together in a building cannot be loosed with shaking: so the heart that is stablished by advised counsel shall fear at no time.
A heart settled upon a thought of understanding is as a fair plaistering on the wall of a gallery.
Pales set on an high place will never stand against the wind: so a fearful heart in the imagination of a fool cannot stand against any fear.
He that pricketh the eye will make tears to fall: and he that pricketh the heart maketh it to shew her knowledge.
Whoso casteth a stone at the birds frayeth them away: and he that upbraideth his friend breaketh friendship.
Though thou drewest a sword at thy friend, yet despair not: for there may be a returning to favour.
If thou hast opened thy mouth against thy friend, fear not; for there may be a reconciliation: except for upbraiding, or pride, or disclosing of secrets, or a treacherous wound: for for these things every friend will depart.
Be faithful to thy neighbour in his poverty, that thou mayest rejoice in his prosperity: abide stedfast unto him in the time of his trouble, that thou mayest be heir with him in his heritage: for a mean estate is not always to be contemned: nor the rich that is foolish to be had in admiration.
As the vapour and smoke of a furnace goeth before the fire; so reviling before blood.
I will not be ashamed to defend a friend; neither will I hide myself from him.
And if any evil happen unto me by him, every one that heareth it will beware of him.
Who shall set a watch before my mouth, and a seal of wisdom upon my lips, that I fall not suddenly by them, and that my tongue destroy me not?
And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying,
Thou shalt also say to the children of Israel, If there shall be any of the children of Israel, or of those who have become proselytes in Israel, who shall give of his seed to Moloch, let him be surely put to death; the nation upon the land shall stone him with stones.
And I will set my face against that man, and will cut him off from his people, because he has given of his seed to Moloch, to defile my sanctuary, and profane the name of them that are consecrated to me.
And if the natives of the land should in anywise overlook that man in giving of his seed to Moloch, so as not to put him to death;
then will I set my face against that man and his family, and I will destroy him, and all who have been of one mind with him, so that he should go a whoring to the princes, from their people.
And the soul that shall follow those who have in them divining spirits, or enchanters, so as to go a whoring after them; I will set my face against that soul, and will destroy it from among its people.
And ye shall be holy, for I the Lord your God am holy.
And ye shall observe my ordinances, and do them: I am the Lord that sanctifies you.
Every man who shall speak evil of his father or of his mother, let him die the death; has he spoken evil of his father or his mother? he shall be guilty.
Whatever man shall commit adultery with the wife of a man, or whoever shall commit adultery with the wife of his neighbour, let them die the death, the adulterer and the adulteress.
And if any one should lie with his father's wife, he has uncovered his father's nakedness: let them both die the death, they are guilty.
And if any one should lie with his daughter-in-law, let them both be put to death; for they have wrought impiety, they are guilty.
And whoever shall lie with a male as with a woman, they have both wrought abomination; let them die the death, they are guilty.
Whosoever shall take a woman and her mother, it is iniquity: they shall burn him and them with fire; so there shall not be iniquity among you.
And whosoever shall lie with a beast, let him die the death; and ye shall kill the beast.
And whatever woman shall approach any beast, so as to have connexion with it, ye shall kill the woman and the beast: let them die the death, they are guilty.
And these are the ordinances and the judgments, which ye shall observe to do in the land, which the Lord God of your fathers gives you for an inheritance, all the days which ye live upon the land.
Ye shall utterly destroy all the places in which they served their gods, whose land ye inherit, on the high mountains and on the hills, and under the thick tree.
And ye shall destroy their altars, and break in pieces their pillars, and ye shall cut down their groves, and ye shall burn with fire the graven images of their gods, and ye shall abolish their name out of that place.
Ye shall not do so to the Lord your God.
But in the place which the Lord thy God shall choose in one of your cities to name his name there, and to be called upon, ye shall even seek him out and go thither.
And ye shall carry thither your whole-burnt-offerings, and your sacrifices, and your first-fruits, and your vowed-offerings, and your freewill-offerings, and your offerings of thanksgiving, the first-born of your herds, and of your flocks.
And ye shall eat there before the Lord your God, and ye shall rejoice in all the things on which ye shall lay your hand, ye and your houses, as the Lord your God has blessed you.
Ye shall not do altogether as we do here to-day, every man that which is pleasing in his own sight.
For hitherto ye have not arrived at the rest and the inheritance, which the Lord our God gives you.
And ye shall go over Jordan, and shall dwell in the land, which the Lord our God takes as an inheritance for you; and he shall give you rest from all your enemies round about, and ye shall dwell safely.
And there shall be a place which the Lord thy God shall choose for his name to be called there, thither shall ye bring all things that I order you to-day; your whole-burnt-offerings, and your sacrifices, and your tithes, and the first-fruits of your hands, and every choice gift of yours, whatsoever ye shall vow to the Lord your God.
And ye shall rejoice before the Lord your God, ye and your sons, and your daughters, and your men-servants and your maid-servants, and the Levite that is at your gates; because he has no portion or inheritance with you.
Take heed to thyself that thou offer not thy whole-burnt-offerings in any place which thou shalt see;
save in the place which the Lord thy God shall choose, in one of thy tribes, there shall ye offer your whole-burnt-offerings, and there shalt thou do all things whatsoever I charge thee this day.
But thou shalt kill according to all thy desire, and shalt eat flesh according to the blessing of the Lord thy God, which he has given thee in every city; the unclean that is within thee and the clean shall eat it on equal terms, as the doe or the stag.
Only ye shall not eat the blood; ye shall pour it out on the ground as water.
Thou shalt not be able to eat in thy cities the tithe of thy corn, and of thy wine, and of thine oil, the first-born of thine herd and of thy flock, and all your vows as many as ye shall have vowed, and your thank-offerings, and the first-fruits of thine hands.
But before the Lord thy God thou shalt eat it, in the place which the Lord thy God shall choose for himself, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, thy man-servant, and thy maid-servant, and the stranger that is within thy gates; and thou shalt rejoice before the Lord thy God, on whatsoever thou shalt lay thine hand.
Take heed to thyself that thou do not desert the Levite all the time that thou livest upon the earth.
And if the Lord thy God shall enlarge thy borders, as he said to thee, and thou shalt say, I will eat flesh; if thy soul should desire to eat flesh, thou shalt eat flesh according to all the desire of thy soul.
And if the place be far from thee, which the Lord thy God shall choose for himself, that his name be called upon it, then thou shalt kill of thy herd and of thy flock which God shall have given thee, even as I commanded thee, and thou shalt eat in thy cities according to the desire of thy soul.
As the doe and the stag are eaten, so shalt thou eat it; the unclean in thee and the clean shall eat it in like manner.
Take diligent heed that thou eat no blood, for blood is the life of it; the life shall not be eaten with the flesh.
Ye shall not eat it; ye shall pour it out on the ground as water.
Thou shalt not eat it, that it may be well with thee and with thy sons after thee, if thou shalt do that which is good and pleasing before the Lord thy God.
But thou shalt take thy holy things, if thou hast any, and thy vowed-offerings, and come to the place which the Lord thy God shall choose to have his name named upon it.
And thou shalt sacrifice thy whole-burnt-offerings, thou shalt offer the flesh upon the altar of the Lord thy God; but the blood of thy sacrifices thou shalt pour out at the foot of the altar of the Lord thy God, but the flesh thou shalt eat.
Beware and hearken, and thou shalt do all the commands which I charge thee, that it may be well with thee and with thy sons for ever, if thou shalt do that which is pleasing and good before the Lord thy God.
And if the Lord thy God shall utterly destroy the nations, to whom thou goest in thither to inherit their land, from before thee, and thou shalt inherit it, and dwell in their land;
take heed to thyself that thou seek not to follow them after they are destroyed before thee, saying, How do these nations act towards their gods? I will do likewise.
Thou shalt not do so to thy God; for they have sacrificed to their gods the abominations of the Lord which he hates, for they burn their sons and their daughters in fire to their gods.
And it came to pass at that time, that Ezekias was sick even to death. And Esaias the prophet the son of Amos came to him, and said to him, Thus saith the Lord, Give orders concerning thy house: for thou shalt die, and not live.
And Ezekias turned his face to the wall, and prayed to the Lord, saying,
Remember, O Lord, how I have walked before thee in truth, with a true heart, and have done that which was pleasing in thy sight. And Ezekias wept bitterly.
And the word of the Lord came to Esaias, saying, Go, and say to Ezekias,
Thus saith the Lord, the God of David thy father, I have heard thy prayer, and seen thy tears: behold, I will add to thy time fifteen years.
And I will deliver thee and this city out of the hand of the king of the Assyrians: and I will defend this city.
And this shall be a sign to thee from the Lord, that God will do this thing;
behold, I will turn back the shadow of the degrees of the dial by which ten degrees on the house of thy father the sun has gone downI will turn back the sun the ten degrees; so the sun went back the ten degrees by which the shadow had gone down.
THE PRAYER OF EZEKIAS KING OF JUDEA, WHEN HE HAD BEEN SICK, AND WAS RECOVERED FROM HIS SICKNESS.
I said in the end of my days, I shall go to the gates of the grave: I shall part with the remainder of my years.
I said, I shall no more at all see the salvation of God in the land of the living: I shall no more at all see the salvation of Israel on the earth: I shall no more at all see man.
My life has failed from among my kindred: I have parted with the remainder of my life: it has gone forth and departed from me, as one that having pitched a tent takes it down again: my breath was with me as a weaver's web, when she that weaves draws nigh to cut off the thread.
In that day I was given up as to a lion until the morning: so has he broken all my bones: for I was so given up from day even to night.
As a swallow, so will I cry, and as a dove, so do I mourn: for mine eyes have failed with looking to the height of heaven to the Lord, who has delivered me, and removed
the sorrow of my soul.
Yea, O Lord, for it was told thee concerning this; and thou hast revived my breath; and I am comforted, and live.
For thou hast chosen my soul, that it should not perish: and thou hast cast all my sins behind me.
For they that are in the grave shall not praise thee, neither shall the dead bless thee, neither shall they that are in Hades hope for thy mercy.
The living shall bless thee, as I also do: for from this day shall I beget children, who shall declare thy righteousness,
O God of my salvation; and I will not cease blessing thee with the psaltery all the days of my life before the house of God.
Now Esaias had said to Ezekias; Take a cake of figs, and mash them, and apply them as a plaster, and thou shalt be well.
And Ezekias said, This is a sign to Ezekias, that I shall go up to the house of God.
And Eliu feared, and rose, and departed for his life: and he comes to Bersabee to the land of Juda, and he left his servant there.
And he himself went a day's journey in the wilderness, and came and sat under a juniper tree; and asked concerning his life that he might die, and said, Let it be enough now, O Lord, take, I pray thee, my life from me; for I am no better than my fathers.
And he lay down and slept there under a tree; and behold, some one touched him, and said to him, Arise and eat.
And Eliu looked, and, behold, at his head there was a cake of meal and a cruse of water; and he arose, and ate and drank, and returned and lay down.
And the angel of the Lord returned again, and touched him, and said to him, Arise, and eat, for the journey is far from thee.
And he arose, and ate and drank, and went in the strength of that meat forty days and forty nights to mount Choreb.
And he entered there into a cave, and rested there; and, behold, the word of the Lord came to him, and he said, What doest thou here, Eliu?
Thus saith the Lord; Go thou, and go down to the house of the king of Juda, and thou shalt speak there this word,
and thou shalt say, Hear the word of the Lord, O king of Juda, that sittest on the throne of David, thou, and thy house, and thy people, and they that go in at these gates:
thus saith the Lord; Execute ye judgment and justice, and rescue the spoiled out of the hand of him that wrongs him: and oppress not the stranger, and orphan, and widow, and sin not, and shed no innocent blood in this place.
For if ye will indeed perform this word, then shall there enter in by the gates of this house kings sitting upon the throne of David, and riding on chariots and horses, they, and their servants, and their people.
He that builds his house not with justice, and his upper chambers not with judgment, who works by means of his neighbour for nothing, and will by no means give him his reward.
Therefore thus saith the Lord concerning Joakim son of Josias, king of Juda, even concerning this man; they shall not bewail him, saying, Ah brother! neither shall they at all weep for him, saying, Alas Lord.
He shall be buried with the burial of an ass; he shall be dragged roughly along and cast outside the gate of Jerusalem.
Land, land, hear the word of the Lord.
Write ye this man an outcast: for there shall none of his seed at all grow up to sit on the throne of David, or as a prince yet in Juda.
Hear these words, all ye nations, hearken, all ye that dwell upon the earth:
both the sons of mean men, and sons of great men; the rich and poor man together.
My mouth shall speak of wisdom; and the meditation of my heart shall bring forth understanding.
I will incline mine ear to a parable: I will open my riddle on the harp.
Wherefore should I fear in the evil day? the iniquity of my heel shall compass me.
They that trust in their strength, and boast themselves in the multitude of their wealth
A brother does not redeem, shall a man redeem? he shall not give to God a ransom for himself,
or the price of the redemption of his soul, though he labour for ever,
and live to the end, so that he should not see corruption.
When he shall see wise men dying, the fool and the senseless one shall perish together; and they shall leave their wealth to strangers.
And their sepulchres are their houses for ever, even their tabernacles to all generations: they have called their lands after their own names.
And man being in honour, understands not: he is compared to the senseless cattle, and is like to them.
This their way is an offence to them: yet afterwards men will commend their sayings. Pause.
They have laid them as sheep in Hades; death shall feed on them; and the upright shall have dominion over them in the morning, and their help shall fail in Hades from their glory.
But God shall deliver my soul from the power of Hades, when he shall receive me. Pause.
Fear not when a man is enriched, and when the glory of his house is increased.
For he shall take nothing when he dies; neither shall his glory descend with him.
For his soul shall be blessed in his life: he shall give thanks to thee when thou dost well to him.
Yet he shall go in to the generation of his fathers; he shall never see light.
Man that is in honour, understands not: he is compared to the senseless cattle, and is like them.
Then Baldad the Sauchite answered and said,
How long wilt thou continue? forbear, that we also may speak.
For wherefore have we been silent before thee like brutes?
Anger has possessed thee: for what if thou shouldest die; would the earth under heaven be desolate? or shall the mountains be overthrown from their foundations?
But the light of the ungodly shall be quenched, and their flame shall not go up.
His light shall be darkness in his habitation, and his lamp shall be put out with him.
Let the meanest of men spoil his goods, and let his counsel deceive him.
His foot also has been caught in a snare, and let it be entangled in a net.
And let snares come upon him: he shall strengthen those that thirst for his destruction.
Let pains destroy him round about, and let many enemies come about him,
vex him with distressing hunger: and a signal destruction has been prepared for him.
Let the soles of his feet be devoured: and death shall consume his beauty.
And let health be utterly banished from his tabernacle, and let distress seize upon him with a charge from the king.
Let his memorial perish out of the earth, and his name shall be publicly cast out.
Let one drive him from light into darkness.
He shall not be known among his people, nor his house preserved on the earth.
But strangers shall dwell in his possessions: the last groaned for him, and wonder seized the first.
These are the houses of the unrighteous, and this is the place of them that know not the Lord.
If thou sit to sup at the table of a prince, consider attentively the things set before thee:
and apply thine hand, knowing that it behoves thee to prepare such meats: but if thou art very insatiable,
desire not his provisions; for these belong to a false life.
If thou art poor, measure not thyself with a rich man; but refrain thyself in thy wisdom.
If thou shouldest fix thine eye upon him, he will disappear; for wings like an eagle's are prepared for him, and he returns to the house of his master.
Sup not with an envious man, neither desire thou his meats:
so he eats and drinks as if any one should swallow a hair, and do not bring him in to thyself, nor eat thy morsel with him:
for he will vomit it up, and spoil thy fair words.
Say nothing in the ears of a fool, lest at any time he sneer at thy wise words.
Remove not the ancient landmarks; and enter not upon the possession of the fatherless:
for the Lord is their redeemer; he is mighty, and will plead their cause with thee.
Apply thine heart to instruction, and prepare thine ears for words of discretion.
Refrain not from chastening a child; for if thou beat him with the rod, he shall not die.
For thou shalt beat him with the rod, and shalt deliver his soul from death.
Son, if thy heart be wise, thou shalt also gladden my heart;
and thy lips shall converse with my lips, if they be right.
Let not thine heart envy sinners: but be thou in the fear of the Lord all the day.
For if thou shouldest keep these things, thou shalt have posterity; and thine hope shall not be removed.
Hear, my son, and be wise, and rightly direct the thoughts of thine heart.
Be not a wine-bibber, neither continue long at feasts, and purchases of flesh:
for every drunkard and whoremonger shall be poor; and every sluggard shall clothe himself with tatters and ragged garments.
Hearken, my son, to thy father which begot thee, and despise not thy mother because she is grown old.
A righteous father brings up his children well; and his soul rejoices over a wise son.
Let thy father and thy mother rejoice over thee, and let her that bore thee be glad.
My son, give me thine heart, and let thine eyes observe my ways.
For a strange house is a vessel full of holes; and a strange well is narrow.
For such a one shall perish suddenly; and every transgressor shall be cut off.
Who has woe? who trouble? who has quarrels? and who vexations and disputes? who has bruises without a cause? whose eyes are livid?
Are not those of them that stay long at wine? are not those of them that haunt the places where banquets are? Be not drunk with wine; but converse with just men, and converse with them openly.
For if thou shouldest set thine eyes on bowls and cups, thou shalt afterwards go more naked than a pestle.
But at last such a one stretches himself out as one smitten by a serpent, and venom is diffused through him as by a horned serpent.
Whenever thine eyes shall behold a strange woman, then thy mouth shall speak perverse things.
And thou shalt lie as in the midst of the sea, and as a pilot in a great storm.
And thou shalt say, They smote me, and I was not pained; and they mocked me, and I knew it not: when will it be morning, that I may go and seek those with whom I may go in company?
Praise becomes thee, O God, in Sion; and to thee shall the vow be performed.
Hear my prayer; to thee all flesh shall come.
The words of transgressors have overpowered us; but do thou pardon our sins.
Blessed is he whom thou hast chosen and adopted; he shall dwell in thy courts; we shall be filled with the good things of thy house; thy temple is holy.
Thou art wonderful in righteousness. Hearken to us, O God our Saviour; the hope of all the ends of the earth, and of them that are on the sea afar off:
who dost establish the mountains in thy strength, being girded about with power;
who troublest the depth of the sea, the sounds of its waves.
The nations shall be troubled, and they that inhabit the ends of the earth shall be afraid of thy signs; thou wilt cause the outgoings of morning and evening to rejoice.
Thou hast visited the earth, and saturated it; thou hast abundantly enriched it. The river of God is filled with water; thou hast prepared their food, for thus is the preparation of it.
Saturate her furrows, multiply her fruits; the crop springing up shall rejoice in its drops.
Thou wilt bless the crown of the year because of thy goodness; and thy plains shall be filled with fatness.
The mountains of the wilderness shall be enriched; and the hills shall gird themselves with joy.
The rams of the flock are clothed with wool, and the valleys shall abound in corn; they shall cry aloud, yea they shall sing hymns.
He that liveth for ever Hath created all things in general.
The Lord only is righteous, and there is none other but he,
To whom hath he given power to declare his works? and who shall find out his noble acts?
Who shall number the strength of his majesty? and who shall also tell out his mercies?
As for the wondrous works of the Lord, there may nothing be taken from them, neither may any thing be put unto them, neither can the ground of them be found out.
When a man hath done, then he beginneth; and when he leaveth off, then he shall be doubtful.
What is man, and whereto serveth he? what is his good, and what is his evil?
The number of a man's days at the most are an hundred years.
As a drop of water unto the sea, and a gravelstone in comparison of the sand; so are a thousand years to the days of eternity.
Therefore is God patient with them, and poureth forth his mercy upon them.
He saw and perceived their end to be evil; therefore he multiplied his compassion.
The mercy of man is toward his neighbour; but the mercy of the Lord is upon all flesh: he reproveth, and nurtureth, and teacheth and bringeth again, as a shepherd his flock.
He hath mercy on them that receive discipline, and that diligently seek after his judgments.
My son, blemish not thy good deeds, neither use uncomfortable words when thou givest any thing.
Shall not the dew asswage the heat? so is a word better than a gift.
Lo, is not a word better than a gift? but both are with a gracious man.
A fool will upbraid churlishly, and a gift of the envious consumeth the eyes.
Learn before thou speak, and use physick or ever thou be sick.
Before judgment examine thyself, and in the day of visitation thou shalt find mercy.
Humble thyself before thou be sick, and in the time of sins shew repentance.
Let nothing hinder thee to pay thy vow in due time, and defer not until death to be justified.
Before thou prayest, prepare thyself; and be not as one that tempteth the Lord.
Think upon the wrath that shall be at the end, and the time of vengeance, when he shall turn away his face.
When thou hast enough, remember the time of hunger: and when thou art rich, think upon poverty and need.
From the morning until the evening the time is changed, and all things are soon done before the Lord.
A wise man will fear in every thing, and in the day of sinning he will beware of offence: but a fool will not observe time.
Every man of understanding knoweth wisdom, and will give praise unto him that found her.
They that were of understanding in sayings became also wise themselves, and poured forth exquisite parables.
Go not after thy lusts, but refrain thyself from thine appetites.
If thou givest thy soul the desires that please her, she will make thee a laughingstock to thine enemies that malign thee.
Take not pleasure in much good cheer, neither be tied to the expense thereof.
Be not made a beggar by banqueting upon borrowing, when thou hast nothing in thy purse: for thou shalt lie in wait for thine own life, and be talked on.
And the Lord will have mercy on Jacob, and will yet choose Israel, and they shall rest on their land: and the stranger shall be added to them, yea, shall be added to the house of Jacob.
And the Gentiles shall take them, and bring them into their place: and they shall inherit them, and they shall be multiplied upon the land for servants and handmaidens: and they that took them captives shall become captives to them; and they that had lordship over them shall be under their rule.
And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall give thee rest from thy sorrow and vexation, and from thy hard servitude wherein thou didst serve them.
And thou shalt take up this lamentation against the king of Babylon, How has the extortioner ceased, and the taskmaster ceased!
The Lord has broken the yoke of sinners, the yoke of princes.
Having smitten a nation in wrath, with an incurable plague, smiting a nation with a wrathful plague, which spared them not, he rested in quiet.
All the earth cries aloud with joy:
the trees also of Libanus rejoice against thee, and the cedar of Libanus, saying, From the time that thou hast been laid low, no one has come up to cut us down.
Hell from beneath is provoked to meet thee: all the great ones that have ruled over the earth have risen up together against thee, they that have raised up from their thrones all the kings of the nations.
All shall answer and say to thee, Thou also hast been taken, even as we; and thou art numbered amongst us.
Thy glory has come down to Hades, and thy great mirth: under thee they shall spread corruption, and the worm shall be thy covering.
How has Lucifer, that rose in the morning, fallen from heaven! He that sent orders to all the nations is crushed to the earth.
But thou saidst in thine heart, I will go up to heaven, I will set my throne above the stars of heaven: I will sit on a lofty mount, on the lofty mountains toward the north:
I will go up above the clouds: I will be like the Most High.
But now thou shalt go down to hell, even to the foundations of the earth.
They that see thee shall wonder at thee, and say, This is the man that troubled the earth, that made kings to shake;
that made the whole world desolate, and destroyed its cities; he loosed not those who were in captivity.
All the kings of the nations lie in honour, every man in his house.
But thou shalt be cast forth on the mountains, as a loathed carcase, with many dead who have been pierced with swords, going down to the grave.
As a garment defiled with blood shall not be pure, so neither shalt thou be pure; because thou hast destroyed my land, and hast slain my people: thou shalt not endure for ever, thou an evil seed.
Prepare thy children to be slain for the sins of their father; that they arise not, and inherit the earth, nor fill the earth with wars.
And I will rise up against them, saith the Lord of hosts, and I will destroy their name, and remnant, and seed: thus saith the Lord.
And I will make the region of Babylon desert, so that hedgehogs shall dwell there, and it shall come to nothing: and I will make it a pit of clay for destruction.
Thus saith the Lord of hosts, As I have said, so it shall be: and as I have purposed, so the matter shall remain:
even to destroy the Assyrians upon my land, and upon my mountains: and they shall be for trampling; and their yoke shall be taken away from them, and their glory shall be taken away from their shoulders.
This is the purpose which the Lord has purposed upon the whole earth: and this the hand that is uplifted against all the nations.
For what the Holy God has purposed, who shall frustrate? and who shall turn back his uplifted hand?
In the year in which king Achaz died this word came.
Rejoice not, all ye Philistines, because the yoke of him that smote you is broken: for out of the seed of the serpent shall come forth the young asps, and their young shall come forth flying serpents,
And the poor shall be fed by him, and poor men shall rest in peace: but he shall destroy thy seed with hunger, and shall destroy thy remnant.
Howl, ye gates of cities; let the cities be troubled and cry, even all the Philistines: for smoke is coming from the north, and there is no possibility of living.
And what shall the kings of the nations answer? That the Lord has founded Sion, and by him the poor of the people shall be saved.
I was glad when they said to me, Let us go into the house of the Lord.
Our feet stood in thy courts, O Jerusalem.
Jerusalem is built as a city whose fellowship is complete.
For thither the tribes went up, the tribes of the Lord, as a testimony for Israel, to give thanks unto the name of the Lord.
For there are set thrones for judgment, even thrones for the house of David.
Pray now for the peace of Jerusalem: and let there be prosperity to them that love thee.
Let peace, I pray, be within thine host, and prosperity in thy palaces.
For the sake of my brethren and my neighbours, I have indeed spoken peace concerning thee.
Because of the house of the Lord our God, I have diligently sought thy good.
Joseph went in to them in the morning, and saw them, and they had been troubled.
And he asked the eunuchs of Pharao who were with him in the prison with his master, saying, Why is it that your countenances are sad to-day?
And they said to him, We have seen a dream, and there is no interpreter of it. And Joseph said to them, Is not the interpretation of them through god? tell than to me.
And Joseph said to him, This is the interpretation of it. The three stems are three days.
Yet three days and Pharao shall remember thy office, and he shall restore thee to thy place of chief cupbearer, and thou shalt give the cup of Pharao into his hand, according to thy former high place, as thou wast wont to be cupbearer.
But remember me of thyself, when it shall be well with thee, and thou shalt deal mercifully with me, and thou shalt make mention of me to Pharao, and thou shalt bring me forth out of this dungeon.
And Jerobaal rose early, the same is Gedeon, and all the people with him, and encamped at the fountain of Arad; and the camp of Madiam was to the north of him, reaching from Gabaathamorai, in the valley.
And the Lord said to Gedeon, I will save you by the three hundred men that lapped, and I will give Madiam into thy hand; and all the rest of the people shall go every one to his place.
And they took the provision of the people in their hand, and their horns; and he sent away every man of Israel each to his tent, and he strengthened the three hundred; and the army of Madiam were beneath him in the valley.
And it came to pass in that night that the Lord said to him, Arise, go down into the camp, for I have delivered it into thy hand.
And if thou art afraid to go down, go down thou and thy servant Phara into the camp.
And thou shalt hear what they shall say, and afterwards thy hands shall be strong, and thou shalt go down into the camp: and he went down and Phara his servant to the extremity of the companies of fifty, which were in the camp.
And Madiam and Amalec and all the children of the east were scattered in the valley, as the locust for multitude; and there was no number to their camels, but they were as the sand on the seashore for multitude.
And Gedeon came, and behold a man was relating to his neighbour a dream, and he said, Behold, I have dreamed a dream, and behold, a cake of barley bread rolling into the camp of Madiam, and it came as far as a tent, and smote it, and it fell, and it turned it up, and the tent fell.
And his neighbour answered and said, This is none other than the sword of Gedeon, son of Joas, a man of Israel: God has delivered Madiam and all the host into his hand.
and the three companies sounded with the horns, and broke the pitchers, and held the torches in their left hands, and in their right hands their horns to sound with; and they cried out, A sword for the Lord and for Gedeon.
And every man stood in his place round about the host; and all the host ran, and sounded an alarm, and fled.
And they sounded with the three hundred horns; and the Lord set every man's sword in all the host against his neighbour.
And the host fled as far as Bethseed Tagaragatha Abel-meula to Tabath; and the men of Israel from Nephthali, and from Aser, and from all Manasse, came to help, and followed after Madiam.
And Gedeon sent messengers into all mount Ephraim, saying, Come down to meet Madiam, and take to yourselves the water as far as Baethera and Jordan: and every man of Ephraim cried out, and they took the water before hand unto Baethera and Jordan.
And they took the princess of Madiam, even Oreb and Zeb; and they slew Oreb in Sur Oreb, and they slew Zeb in Jakephzeph; and they pursued Madiam, and brought the heads of Oreb and Zeb to Gedeon from beyond Jordan.
And there was war for a long time between the house of Saul and the house of David; and the house of David grew continually stronger; but the house of Saul grew continually weaker.
And sons were born to David in Chebron: and his first-born was Ammon the son of Achinoom the Jezraelitess.
And his second son was Daluia, the son of Abigaia the Carmelitess; and the third, Abessalom the son of Maacha the daughter of Tholmi the king of Gessir.
And the fourth was Ornia, the son of Aggith, and the fifth was Saphatia, the son of Abital.
And the sixth was Jetheraam, the son of Aegal the wife of David. These were born to David in Chebron.
And it came to pass while there was war between the house of Saul and the house of David, that Abenner was governing the house of Saul.
And Saul had a concubine, Respha, the daughter of Jol; and Jebosthe the son of Saul said to Abenner, Why hast thou gone in to my father's concubine?
And Abenner was very angry with Jebosthe for this saying; and Abenner said to him, Am I a dog's head? I have this day wrought kindness with the house of Saul thy father, and with his brethren and friends, and have not gone over to the house of David, and dost thou this day seek a charge against me concerning injury to a woman?
God do thus and more also to Abenner, if as the Lord swore to David, so do I not to him this day;
to take away the kingdom from the house of Saul, and to raise up the throne of David over Israel and over Juda from Dan to Bersabee.
And Jebosthe could not any longer answer Abenner a word, because he feared him.
And Abenner sent messengers to David to Thaelam where he was, immediately, saying, Make thy covenant with me, and, behold, my hand is with thee to bring back to thee all the house of Israel.
And David said, With a good will I will make with thee a covenant: only I demand one condition of thee, saying, Thou shalt not see my face, unless thou bring Melchol the daughter of Saul, when thou comest to see my face.
And David sent messengers to Jebosthe the son of Saul, saying, Restore me my wife Melchol, whom I took for a hundred foreskins of the Philistines.
And Jebosthe sent, and took her from her husband, even from Phaltiel the son of Selle.
And her husband went with her weeping behind her as far as Barakim. And Abenner said to him, Go, return; and he returned.
And Abenner spoke to the elders of Israel, saying, In former days ye sought David to reign over you;
and now perform it: for the Lord has spoken concerning David, saying, By the hand of my servant David I will save Israel out of the hand of all their enemies.
And Abenner spoke in the ears of Benjamin: and Abenner went to speak in the ears of David at Chebron, all that seemed good in the eyes of Israel and in the eyes of the house of Benjamin.
And Abenner came to David to Chebron, and with him twenty men: and David made for Abenner and his men with him a banquet of wine.
And Abenner said to David, I will arise now, and go, and gather to my lord the king all Israel; and I will make with him a covenant, and thou shalt reign over all whom thy soul desires. And David sent away Abenner, and he departed in peace.
And, behold, the servants of David and Joab arrived from their expedition, and they brought much spoil with them: and Abenner was not with David in Chebron, because he had sent him away, and he had departed in peace.
And Joab and all his army came, and it was reported to Joab, saying, Abenner the son of Ner is come to David, and David has let him go, and he has departed in peace.
And Joab went in to the king, and said, What is this that thou hast done? behold, Abenner came to thee; and why hast thou let him go, and he has departed in peace?
Knowest thou not the mischief of Abenner the son of Ner, that he came to deceive thee, and to know thy going out and thy coming in, and to know all things that thou doest?
And Joab returned from David, and sent messengers to Abenner after him; and they bring him back from the well of Seiram: but David knew it not.
And he brought back Abenner to Chebron, and Joab caused him to turn aside from the gate to speak to him, laying wait for him: and he smote him there in the loins, and he died for the blood of Asael the brother of Joab.
And David heard of it afterwards, and said, I and my kingdom are guiltless before the Lord even for ever of the blood of Abenner the son of Ner.
Let it fall upon the head of Joab, and upon all the house of his father; and let there not be wanting of the house of Joab one that has an issue, or a leper, or that leans on a staff, or that falls by the sword, or that wants bread.
For Joab and Abessa his brother laid wait continually for Abenner, because he slew Asael their brother at Gabaon in the battle.
And David said to Joab and to all the people with him, Rend your garments, and gird yourselves with sackcloth, and lament before Abenner. And king David followed the bier.
And they bury Abenner in Chebron: and the king lifted up his voice, and wept at his tomb, and all the people wept for Abenner.
And the king mourned over Abenner, and said, Shall Abenner die according to the death of Nabal?
Thy hands were not bound, and thy feet were not put in fetters: one brought thee not near as Nabal; thou didst fall before children of iniquity.
And all the people assembled to weep for him. And all the people came to cause David to eat bread while it was yet day: and David swore, saying, God do so to me, and more also, if I eat bread or any thing else before the sun goes down.
And all the people took notice, and all things that the king did before the people were pleasing in their sight.
So all the people and all Israel perceived in that day, that it was not of the king to slay Abenner the son of Ner.
And the king said to his servants, Know ye not that a great prince is this day fallen in Israel?
And that I am this day a mere kinsman of his, and as it were a subject; but these men the sons of Saruia are too hard for me: the Lord reward the evil-doer according to his wickedness.
And Elius continued, and said,
Hear me, ye wise men; hearken, ye that have knowledge.
And he has erred in my judgment: my wound is severe without unrighteousness of mine.
saying, I have not sinned, nor committed ungodliness, nor had fellowship with workers of iniquity, to go with the ungodly.
For thou shouldest not say, There shall be no visitation of a man, whereas there is a visitation on him from the Lord.
Wherefore hear me, ye that are wise in heart: far be it from me to sin before the Lord, and to pervert righteousness before the almighty.
Yea, he renders to a man accordingly as each of them does, and in a man's path he will find him.
And thinkest thou that the Lord will do wrong, or will the Almighty who made the earth wrest judgment?
And who is he that made the whole world under heaven, and all things therein?
For if he would confine, and restrain his spirit with himself;
all flesh would die together, and every mortal would return to the earth, whence also he was formed.
Take heed lest he rebuke thee: hear this, hearken to the voice of words.
Behold then the one that hates iniquities, and that destroys the wicked, who is for ever just.
He is ungodly that says to a king, Thou art a transgressor, that says to princes, O most ungodly one.
Such a one as would not reverence the face of an honourable man, neither knows how to give honour to the great, so as that their persons should be respected.
But it shall turn out vanity to them, to cry and beseech a man; for they dealt unlawfully, the poor being turned aside from their right.
For he surveys the works of men, and nothing of what they do has escaped him.
Neither shall there be a place for the workers of iniquity to hide themselves.
For he will not lay upon a man more than right.
For the Lord looks down upon all men, who comprehends unsearchable things, glorious also and excellent things without number.
Who discovers their works, and will bring night about upon them, and they shall be brought low.
And he quite destroys the ungodly, for they are seen before him.
Because they turned aside from the law of God, and did not regard his ordinances,
Because the wise in heart shall say this, and a wise man listens to my word.
But Job has not spoken with understanding, his words are not uttered with knowledge.
Howbeit do thou learn, Job: no longer make answer as the foolish:
that we add not to our sins: for iniquity will be reckoned against us, if we speak many words before the Lord.
I will bless the Lord at all times: his praise shall be continually in my mouth.
My soul shall boast herself in the Lord: let the meek hear, and rejoice.
Magnify ye the Lord with me, and let us exalt his name together.
I sought the Lord diligently, and he hearkened to me, and delivered me from all my sojournings.
Draw near to him, and be enlightened: and your faces shall not by any means be ashamed.
This poor man cried, and the Lord hearkened to him, and delivered him out of all his afflictions.
The angel of the Lord will encamp round about them that fear him, and will deliver them.
Taste and see that the Lord is good: blessed is the man who hopes in him.
Fear the Lord, all ye his saints: for there is no want to them that fear him.
The rich have become poor and hungry: but they that seek the Lord diligently shall not want any good thing. Pause.
Come, ye children, hear me: I will teach you the fear of the Lord.
What man is there that desires life, loving to see good days?
Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile.
Turn away from evil, and do good; seek peace, and pursue it.
The eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, and his ears are open to their prayer:
but the face of the Lord is against them that do evil, to destroy their memorial from the earth. The righteous cried, and the Lord hearkened to them,
and delivered them out of all their afflictions.
The Lord is near to them that are of a contrite heart; and will save the lowly in spirit.
Many are the afflictions of the righteous: but out of them all Lord will deliver them.
He keeps all their bones: not one of them shall be broken.
The death of sinners is evil: and they that hate righteousness will go wrong.
The Lord will redeem the souls of his servants: and none of those that hope in him shall go wrong.
Then sang Moses and the children of Israel this song to God, and spoke, saying, Let us sing to the Lord, for he is very greatly glorified: horse and rider he has thrown into the sea.
He was to me a helper and protector for salvation: this is my God and I will glorify him; my father's God, and I will exalt him.
The Lord bringing wars to nought, the Lord is his name.
He has cast the chariots of Pharao and his host into the sea, the chosen mounted captains: they were swallowed up in the Red Sea.
He covered them with the sea: they sank to the depth like a stone.
Thy right hand, O God, has been glorified in strength; thy right hand, O God, has broken the enemies.
And in the abundance of thy glory thou hast broken the adversaries to pieces: thou sentest forth thy wrath, it devoured them as stubble.
And by the breath of thine anger the water parted asunder; the waters were congealed as a wall, the waves were congealed in the midst of the sea.
The enemy said, I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoils; I will satisfy my soul, I will destroy with my sword, my hand shall have dominion.
Thou sentest forth thy wind, the sea covered them; they sank like lead in the mighty water.
Who is like to thee among the gods, O Lord? who is like to thee? glorified in holiness, marvellous in glories, doing wonders.
Thou stretchedst forth thy right hand, the earth swallowed them up.
Thou hast guided in thy righteousness this thy people whom thou hast redeemed, by thy strength thou hast called them into thy holy resting-place.
The nations heard and were angry, pangs have seized on the dwellers among the Phylistines.
Then the princes of Edom, and the chiefs of the Moabites hasted; trembling took hold upon them, all the inhabitants of Chanaan melted away.
Let trembling and fear fall upon them; by the greatness of thine arm, let them become as stone; till thy people pass over, O Lord, till this thy people pass over, whom thou hast purchased.
Bring them in and plant them in the mountain of their inheritance, in thy prepared habitation, which thou, O Lord, hast prepared; the sanctuary, O Lord, which thine hands have made ready.
The Lord reigns for ever and ever and ever.
For the horse of Pharao went in with the chariots and horsemen into the sea, and the Lord brought upon them the water of the sea, but the children of Israel walked through dry land in the midst of the sea.
And Mariam the prophetess, the sister of Aaron, having taken a timbrel in her handthen there went forth all the women after her with timbrels and dances.
And Mariam led them, saying, Let us sing to the Lord, for he has been very greatly glorified: the horse and rider has he cast into the sea.
So Moses brought up the children of Israel from the Red Sea, and brought them into the wilderness of Sur; and they went three days in the wilderness, and found no water to drink.
and they came to Merrha, and could not drink of Merrha, for it was bitter; therefore he named the name of that place, Bitterness.
And the people murmured against Moses, saying, What shall we drink?
And Moses cried to the Lord, and the Lord shewed him a tree, and he cast it into the water, and the water was sweetened: there he established to him ordinances and judgments, and there he proved him,
and said, If thou wilt indeed hear the voice of the Lord thy God, and do things pleasing before him, and wilt hearken to his commands, and keep all his ordinances, no disease which I have brought upon the Egyptians will I bring upon thee, for I am the Lord thy God that heals thee.
And they came to Aelim, and there were there twelve fountains of water, and seventy stems of palm-trees; and they encamped there by the waters.
And now thus saith the Lord God that made thee, O Jacob, and formed thee, O Israel, Fear not: for I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy name; thou art mine.
And if thou pass through water, I am with thee; and the rivers shall not overflow thee: and if thou go through fire, thou shalt not be burned; the flame shall not burn thee.
For I am the Lord thy God, the Holy One of Israel, that saves thee: I have made Egypt and Ethiopia thy ransom, and given Soene for thee.
Since thou becamest precious in my sight, thou hast become glorious, and I have loved thee: and I will give men for thee, and princes for thy life.
Fear not; for I am with thee: I will bring thy seed from the east, and will gather thee from the west.
I will say to the north, Bring; and to the south, Keep not back; bring my sons from the land afar off, and my daughters from the ends of the earth;
even all who are called by my name: for I have prepared him for my glory, and I have formed him, and have made him:
and I have brought forth the blind people; for their eyes are alike blind, and they that have ears are deaf.
All the nations are gathered together, and princes shall be gathered out of them: who will declare these things? or who will declare to you things from the beginning? let them bring forth their witnesses, and be justified; and let them hear, and declare the truth.
Be ye my witnesses, and I too am a witness, saith the Lord God, and my servant whom I have chosen: that ye may know, and believe, and understand that I am he: before me there was no other God, and after me there shall be none.
I am God; and beside me there is no Saviour.
I have declared, and have saved; I have reproached, and there was no strange god among you: ye are my witnesses, and I am the Lord God,
even from the beginning; and there is none that can deliver out of my hands: I will work, and who shall turn it back?
Thus saith the Lord God that redeems you, the Holy One of Israel; for your sakes I will send to Babylon, and I will stir up all that flee, and the Chaldeans shall be bound in ships.
I am the Lord God, your Holy One, who have appointed for Israel your king.
Thus saith the Lord, who makes a way in the sea, and a path in the mighty water;
who brought forth chariots and horse, and a mighty multitude: but they have lain down, and shall not rise: they are extinct, as quenched flax.
Remember ye not the former things, and consider not the ancient things.
Behold, I will do new things, which shall presently spring forth, and ye shall know them: and I will make a way in the wilderness, and rivers in the dry land.
the beasts of the field shall bless me, the owls and young ostriches; for I have given water in the wilderness, and rivers in the dry land, to give drink to my chosen race,
my people whom I have preserved to tell forth my praises.
I have not now called thee, O Jacob; neither have I made thee weary, O Israel.
Thou hast not brought me the sheep of thy whole-burnt-offering; neither hast thou glorified me with thy sacrifices. I have not caused thee to serve with sacrifices, neither have I wearied thee with frankincense.
Neither hast thou purchased for me victims for silver, neither have I desired the fat of thy sacrifices: but thou didst stand before me in thy sins, and in thine iniquities.
I, even I, am he that blots out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and thy sins; and I will not remember them.
But do thou remember, and let us plead together: do thou first confess thy transgressions, that thou mayest be justified.
Your fathers first, and your princes have transgressed against me.
And the princes have defiled my sanctuaries: so I gave Jacob to enemies to destroy, and Israel to reproach.
And ye shall be circumcised in the flesh of your foreskin, and it shall be for a sign of a covenant between me and you.
And the child of eight days shall be circumcised by you, every male throughout your generations, and born in the house and he that is bought with money, of every son of a stranger, who is not of thy seed.
He that is born in thy house, and he that is bought with money shall be surely circumcised, and my covenant shall be on your flesh for an everlasting covenant.
and all the men of his house, both those born in the house, and those bought with money of foreign nations.
And the Lord sent among the people deadly serpents, and they bit the people, and much people of the children of Israel died.
And the people came to Moses and said, We have sinned, for we have spoken against the Lord, and against thee: pray therefore to the Lord, and let him take away the serpent from us.
And Moses prayed to the Lord for the people; and the Lord said to Moses, Make thee a serpent, and put it on a signal-staff; and it shall come to pass that whenever a serpent shall bite a man, every one so bitten that looks upon it shall live.
And Moses made a serpent of brass, and put it upon a signal-staff: and it came to pass that whenever a serpent bit a man, and he looked on the brazen serpent, he lived.
And Moses was feeding the flock of Jothor his father-in-law, the priest of Madiam; and he brought the sheep nigh to the wilderness, and came to the mount of Choreb.
And an angel of the Lord appeared to him in flaming fire out of the bush, and he sees that the bush burns with fire, but the bush was not consumed.
And Moses said, I will go near and see this great sight, why the bush is not consumed.
And when the Lord saw that he drew nigh to see, the Lord called him out of the bush, saying, Moses, Moses; and he said, What is it?
And he said, Draw not nigh hither: loose thy sandals from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground.
And he said, I am the God of thy father, the God of Abraam, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob; and Moses turned away his face, for he was afraid to gaze at God.
And the Lord said to Moses, I have surely seen the affliction of my people that is in Egypt, and I have heard their cry caused by their task-masters; for I know their affliction.
And I have come down to deliver them out of the hand of the Egyptians, and to bring them out of that land, and to bring them into a good and wide land, into a land flowing with milk and honey, into the place of the Chananites, and the Chettites, and Amorites, and Pherezites, and Gergesites, and Evites, and Jebusites.
And now, behold, the cry of the children of Israel is come to me, and I have seen the affliction with which the Egyptians afflict them.
And now come, I will send thee to Pharao king of Egypt, and thou shalt bring out my people the children of Israel from the land of Egypt.
And Moses said to God, Who am I, that I should go to Pharao king of Egypt, and that I should bring out the children of Israel from the land of Egypt?
And God spoke to Moses, saying, I will be with thee, and this shall be the sign to thee that I shall send thee forth, when thou bringest out my people out of Egypt, then ye shall serve God in this mountain.
And Moses said to God, Behold, I shall go forth to the children of Israel, and shall say to them, The God of our fathers has sent me to you; and they will ask me, What is his name? What shall I say to them?
And God spoke to Moses, saying, I am THE BEING; and he said, Thus shall ye say to the children of Israel, THE BEING has sent me to you.
And God said again to Moses, Thus shalt thou say to the sons of Israel, The Lord God of our fathers, the God of Abraam, and God of Isaac, and God of Jacob, has sent me to you: this is my name for ever, and my memorial to generations of generations.
Go then and gather the elders of the children of Israel, and thou shalt say to them, The Lord God of our fathers has appeared to me, the God of Abraam, and God of Isaac, and God of Jacob, saying, I have surely looked upon you, and upon all the things which have happened to you in Egypt.
And he said, I will bring you up out of the affliction of the Egyptians to the land of the Chananites and the Chettites, and Amorites and Pherezites, and Gergesites, and Evites, and Jebusites, to a land flowing with milk and honey.
And they shall hearken to thy voice, and thou and the elders of Israel shall go in to Pharao king of Egypt, and thou shalt say to him, The God of the Hebrews has called us; we will go then a journey of three days into the wilderness, that we may sacrifice to our God.
But I know that Pharao king of Egypt will not let you go, save with a mighty hand;
and I will stretch out my hand, and smite the Egyptians with all my wonders, which I shall work among them, and after that he will send you forth.
And I will give this people favour in the sight of the Egyptians, and whenever ye shall escape, ye shall not depart empty.
But every woman shall ask of her neighbour and fellow lodger, articles of gold and silver, and apparel; and ye shall put them upon your sons and upon your daughters, and spoil ye the Egyptians.
Judge me, O Lord; for I have walked in my innocence: and hoping in the Lord I shall not be moved.
Prove me, O Lord, and try me; purify as with fire my reins and my heart.
For thy mercy is before mine eyes: and I am well pleased with thy truth.
I have not sat with the council of vanity, and will in nowise enter in with transgressors.
I have hated the assembly of wicked doers; and will not sit with ungodly men.
I will wash my hands in innocency, and compass thine altar, O Lord:
to hear the voice of praise, and to declare all thy wonderful works.
O Lord, I have loved the beauty of thy house, and the place of the tabernacle of thy glory.
Destroy not my soul together with the ungodly, nor my life with bloody men:
in whose hands are iniquities, and their right hand is filled with bribes.
But I have walked in my innocence: redeem me, and have mercy upon me.
My foot stands in an even place: in the congregations will I bless thee, O Lord.
Then Eliphaz the Thaemanite answered and said,
Is it not the Lord that teaches understanding and knowledge?
For what matters it to the Lord, if thou wert blameless in thy works? or is it profitable that thou shouldest perfect thy way?
Wilt thou maintain and plead thine own cause? and will he enter into judgment with thee?
Is not thy wickedness abundant, and thy sins innumerable?
And thou hast taken security of thy brethren for nothing, and hast taken away the clothing of the naked.
Neither hast thou given water to the thirsty to drink, but hast taken away the morsel of the hungry.
And thou hast accepted the persons of some; and thou hast established those that were already settled on the earth.
But thou hast sent widows away empty, and has afflicted orphans.
Therefore snares have compassed thee, and disastrous war has troubled thee.
The light has proved darkness to thee, and water has covered thee on thy lying down.
Does not he that dwells in the high places observe? and has he not brought down the proud?
Who say, What will the Lord do to us? or what will the Almighty bring upon us?
Yet he filled their houses with good things: but the counsel for the wicked is far from him.
The righteous have seen it, and laughed, and the blameless one has derided them.
Be firm, I pray thee, if thou canst endure; then thy fruit shall prosper.
And receive a declaration from his mouth, and lay up his words in thine heart.
And if thou shalt turn and humble thyself before the Lord, thou hast thus removed unrighteousness far from thy habitation.
So the Almighty shall be thy helper from enemies, and he shall bring thee forth pure as silver that has been tried by fire.
Then shalt thou have boldness before the Lord, looking up cheerfully to heaven.
And he shall hear thee when thou prayest to him, and he shall grant thee power to pay thy vows.
And he shall establish to thee again a habitation of righteousness and there shall be light upon thy paths.
And David fled from Navath in Rama, and comes into the presence of Jonathan; and he said, What have I done, and what is my fault, and wherein have I sinned before thy father, that he seeks my life?
And Jonathan said to him, Far be it from thee: thou shalt not die: behold, my father will not do any thing great or small without discovering it to me; and why should my father hide this matter from me? This thing is not so.
And David answered Jonathan, and said, Thy father knows surely that I have found grace in thy sight, and he said, Let not Jonathan know this, lest he refuse his consent: but as the Lord lives and thy soul lives, as I said, the space is filled up between me and death.
And Jonathan said to David, What does thy soul desire, and what shall I do for thee.
And David said to Jonathan, Behold, to-morrow is the new moon, and I shall not on any account sit down to eat, but thou shalt let me go, and I will hide in the plain till the evening.
And if thy father do in anywise enquire for me, then shalt thou say, David earnestly asked leave of me to run to Bethleem his city, for there is there, a yearly sacrifice for all the family.
If he shall say thus, Well,  all is safe for thy servant: but if he shall answer harshly to thee, know that evil is determined by him.
And thou shalt deal mercifully with thy servant; for thou hast brought thy servant into a covenant of the Lord with thyself: and if there is iniquity in thy servant, slay me thyself; but why dost thou thus bring me to thy father?
And Jonathan said, That be far from thee: for if I surely know that evil is determined by my father to come upon thee, although it should not be against thy cities, I will tell thee.
And David said to Jonathan, Who can tell me if thy father should answer roughly?
And Jonathan said to David, Go, and abide in the field. And they went out both into the field.
And Jonathan said to David, the Lord God of Israel knows that I will sound my father as I have an opportunity, three several times, and, behold, if good should be determined concerning David, and I do not send to thee to the field,
God do so to Jonathan and more also: as I shall also report the evil to thee, and make it known to thee, and I will let thee go; and thou shalt depart in peace, and the Lord shall be with thee, as he was with my father.
And if indeed I continue to live, then shalt thou deal mercifully with me; and if I indeed die,
thou shalt not withdraw thy mercy from my house for ever: and if thou doest not, when the Lord cuts off the enemies of David each from the face of the earth,
should it happen that the name of Jonathan be discovered by the house of David, then let the Lord seek out the enemies of David.
And Jonathan swore yet again to David, because he loved the soul of him that loved him.
And Jonathan said, To-morrow is the new moon, and thou wilt be enquired for, because thy seat will be observed as vacant.
And thou shalt stay three days, and watch an opportunity, and shalt come to thy place where thou mayest hide thyself in the day of thy business, and thou shalt wait by that ergab.
And I will shoot three arrows, aiming them at a mark.
And behold, I will send a lad, saying, Go find me the arrow.
If I should expressly say to the lad, The arrow is here, and on this side of thee, take it; then come, for it is well with thee, and there is no reason for fear, as the Lord lives: but if I should say thus to the young man, The arrow is on that side of thee, and beyond; go, for the Lord hath sent thee away.
And as for the word which thou and I have spoken, behold, the Lord is witness between me and thee for ever.
So David hides himself in the field, and the new month arrives, and the king comes to the table to eat.
And he sat upon his seat as in former times, even on his seat by the wall, and he went before Jonathan; and Abenner sat on one side of Saul, and the place of David was empty.
And Saul said nothing on that day, for he said, It seems to have fallen out that he is not clean, because he has not purified himself.
And it came to pass on the morrow, on the second day of the month, that the place of David was empty; and Saul said to Jonathan his son, Why has not the son of Jessae attended both yesterday and today at the table?
And Jonathan answered Saul, and said to him, David asked leave of me to go as far as Bethleem his city;
and he said, Let me go, I pray thee, for we have a family sacrifice in the city, and my brethren have sent for me; and now, if I have found grace in thine eyes, I will even go over and see my brethren: therefore he is not present at the table of the king.
And Saul was exceedingly angry with Jonathan, and said to him, Thou son of traitorous damsels! for do I not know that thou art an accomplice with the son of Jessae to thy same, and to the shame of thy mother's nakedness?
For so long as the son of Jessae lives upon the earth, thy kingdom shall not be established: now then send and take the young man, for he shall surely die.
And Jonathan answered Saul, Why is he to die? What has he done?
And Saul lifted up his spear against Jonathan to slay him: so Jonathan knew that this evil was determined on by his father to slay David.
And Jonathan sprang up from the table in great anger, and did not eat bread on the second day of the month, for he grieved bitterly for David, because his father determined on mischief against him.
And morning came, and Jonathan went out to the field, as he appointed to do for a signal to David, and a little boy was with him.
And he said to the boy, Run, find me the arrows which I shoot: and the boy ran, and Jonathan shot an arrow, and sent it beyond him.
And the boy came to the place where the arrow was which Jonathan shot; and Jonathan cried out after the lad, and said, The arrow is on that side of thee and beyond thee.
And Jonathan cried out after his boy, saying, Make all speed, and stay not. And Jonathan's boy gathered up the arrows, and brought the arrows to his master.
And the boy knew nothing, only Jonathan and David knew.
And Jonathan gave his weapons to his boy, and said to his boy, Go, enter into the city.
And when the lad went in, then David arose from the argab, and fell upon his face, and did obeisance to him three times, and they kissed each other, and wept for each other, for a great while.
And Jonathan said to David, Go in peace, and as we have both sworn in the name of the Lord, saying, The Lord shall be witness between me and thee, and between my seed and thy seed for evereven so let it be. And David arose and departed, and Jonathan went into the city.
Ye that thirst, go to the water, and all that have no money, go and buy; and eat and drink wine and fat without money or price.
Wherefore do ye value at the price of money, and give your labour for that which will not satisfy? hearken to me, and ye shall eat that which is good, and your soul shall feast itself on good things.
Give heed with your ears, and follow my ways: hearken to me, and your soul shall live in prosperity; and I will make with you an everlasting covenant, the sure mercies of David.
Behold I have made him a testimony among the Gentiles, a prince and commander to the Gentiles.
Nations which know thee not, shall call upon thee, and peoples which are not acquainted with thee, shall flee to thee for refuge, for the sake of the Lord thy God, the Holy One of Israel; for he has glorified thee.
Seek ye the Lord, and when ye find him, call upon him; and when he shall draw nigh to you,
let the ungodly leave his ways, and the transgressor his counsels: and let him return to the Lord, and he shall find mercy; for he shall abundantly pardon your sins.
For my counsels are not as your counsels, nor are my ways as your ways, saith the Lord.
But as the heaven is distant from the earth, so is my way distant from your ways, and your thoughts from my mind.
For as rain shall come down, or snow, from heaven, and shall not return until it have saturated the earth, and it bring forth, and bud, and give seed to the sower, and bread for food:
so shall my word be, whatever shall proceed out of my mouth, it shall by no means turn back, until all the things which I willed shall have been accomplished; and I will make thy ways prosperous, and will effect my commands.
For ye shall go forth with joy, and shall be taught with gladness: for the mountains and the hills shall exult to welcome you with joy, and all the trees of the field shall applaud with their branches.
And instead of the bramble shall come up the cypress, and instead of the nettle shall come up the myrtle: and the Lord shall be for a name, and for an everlasting sign, and shall not fail.
The folly of a man spoils his ways: and he blames God in his heart.
Wealth acquires many friends; but the poor is deserted even of the friend he has.
A false witness shall not be unpunished, and he that accuses unjustly shall not escape.
Many court the favour of kings; but every bad man becomes a reproach to another man.
Every one who hates his poor brother shall also be far from friendship. Good understanding will draw near to them that know it, and a sensible man will find it. He that does much harm perfects mischief; and he that used provoking words shall not escape.
He that procures wisdom loves himself; and he that keeps wisdom shall find good.
A false witness shall not be unpunished; and whosoever shall kindle mischief shall perish by it.
Delight does not suit a fool, nor is it seemly if a servant should begin to rule with haughtiness.
A merciful man is long-suffering; and his triumph overtakes transgressors.
The threatening of a king is like the roaring of a lion; but as dew on the grass, so is his favour.
A foolish son is a disgrace to his father: vows paid out of the hire of a harlot are not pure.
Fathers divide house and substance to their children: but a wife is suited to a man by the Lord.
Cowardice possesses the effeminate man; and the soul of the sluggard shall hunger.
He that keeps the commandment keeps his own soul; but he that despises his ways shall perish.
He that has pity on the poor lends to the Lord; and he will recompense to him according to his gift.
Chasten thy son, for so he shall be hopeful; and be not exalted in thy soul to haughtiness.
A malicious man shall be severely punished, and if he commit injury, he shall also lose his life.
Hear, son, the instruction of thy father, that thou mayest be wise at thy latter end.
There are many thoughts in a man's heart; but the counsel of the Lord abides for ever.
Mercy is a fruit to a man: and a poor man is better than a rich liar.
The fear of the Lord is life to a man: and he shall lodge without fear in places where knowledge is not seen.
He that unjustly hides his hands in his bosom, will not even bring them up to his mouth.
When a pestilent character is scourged, a simple man is made wiser: and if thou reprove a wise man, he will understand discretion.
He that dishonours his father, and drives away his mother, shall be disgraced and shall be exposed to reproach.
A son who ceases to attend to the instruction of a father will cherish evil designs.
He that becomes surety for a foolish child will despise the ordinance: and the mouth of ungodly men shall drink down judgment.
Scourges are preparing for the intemperate, and punishments likewise for fools.
To all things there is a time, and a season for every matter under heaven.
A time of birth, and a time to die; a time to plant, and a time to pluck up what has been planted;
a time to kill, and a time to heal; a time to pull down, and a time to build up;
a time to weep, and a time to laugh; a time to lament, and a time to dance;
a time to throw stones, and a time to gather stones together; a time to embrace, and a time to abstain from embracing;
a time to seek, and a time to lose; a time to keep, and a time to cast away;
a time to rend, and a time to sew; a time to be silent, and a time to speak;
a time to love, and a time to hate; a time of war, and a time of peace.
What advantage has he that works in those things wherein he labours?
I have seen all the trouble, which God has given to the sons of men to be troubled with.
All the things which he has made are beautiful in his time: he has also set the whole world in their heart, that man might not find out the work which God has wrought from the beginning even to the end.
I know that there is no good in them, except for a man to rejoice, and to do good in his life.
Also in the case of every man who shall eat and drink, and see good in all his labour, this is a gift of God.
I know that whatsoever things God has done, they shall be for ever: it is impossible to add to it, and it is impossible to take away from it: and God has done it, that men may fear before him.
That which has been is now; and whatever things are appointed to be have already been; and God will seek out that which is past.
And moreover I saw under the sun the place of judgment, there was the ungodly one; and the place of righteousness, there was the godly one.
And I said in my heart, God will judge the righteous and the ungodly: for there is a time there for every action and for every work.
I said in my heart, concerning the speech of the sons of man, God will judge them, and that to shew that they are breasts.
Also to them is the event of the sons of man, and the event of the brute; one event befalls them: as is the death of the one, so also the death of the other; and there is one breath to all: and what has the man more than the brute? nothing; for all is vanity.
All go to one place; all were formed of the dust, and all will return to dust.
And who has seen the spirit of the sons of man, whether it goes upward? and the spirit of the beast, whether it goes downward to the earth?
And I saw that there was no good, but that wherein a man shall rejoice in his works, for it is his portion, for who shall bring him to see any thing of that which shall be after him?
Will fertilising streams fail to flow from a rock, or snow fail from Libanus? will water violently impelled by the wind turn aside?
For my people have forgotten me, they have offered incense in vain, and they fail in their ways, leaving the ancient tracks, to enter upon impassable paths;
to make their land a desolation, and a perpetual hissing; all that go through it shall be amazed, and shall shake their heads.
I will scatter them before their enemies like an east wind; I will shew them the day of their destruction.
Then they said, Come, and let us devise a device against Jeremias; for the law shall not perish from the priest, nor counsel from the wise, nor the word from the prophet. Come, and let us smite him with the tongue, and we will hear all his words.
Hear me, O Lord, and hear the voice of my pleading.
Forasmuch as evil is rewarded for good; for they have spoken words against my soul, and they have hidden the punishment they meant for me; remember that I stood before thy face, to speak good for them, to turn away thy wrath from them.
Therefore do thou deliver their sons to famine, and gather them to the power of the sword: let their women be childless and widows; and let their men be cut off by death, and their young men fall by the sword in war.
Let there be a cry in their houses: thou shalt bring upon them robbers suddenly: for they have formed a plan to take me, and have hidden snares for me.
And thou, Lord, knowest all their deadly counsel against me: account not their iniquities guiltless, and blot not out their sins from before thee: let their weakness come before thee; deal with them in the time of thy wrath.
How good is God to Israel, to the upright in heart!
But my feet were almost overthrown; my goings very nearly slipped.
For I was jealous of the transgressors, beholding the tranquility of sinners.
For there is no sign of reluctance in their death: and they have firmness under their affliction.
They are not in the troubles of other men; and they shall not be scourged with other men.
Therefore pride has possessed them; they have clothed themselves with their injustice and ungodliness.
Their injustice shall go forth as out of fatness: they have fulfilled their intention.
They have taken counsel and spoken in wickedness: they have uttered unrighteousness loftily.
They have set their mouth against heaven, and their tongue has gone through upon the earth.
Therefore shall my people return hither: and full days shall be found with them.
And they said, How does God know? and is there knowledge in the Most High?
Behold, these are the sinners, and they that prosper always: they have possessed wealth.
And I said, Verily in vain have I justified my heart, and washed my hands in innocency.
For I was plagued all the day, and my reproof was every morning.
If I said, I will speak thus; behold, I should have broken covenant with the generation of thy children.
And I undertook to understand this, but it is too hard for me,
until I go into the sanctuary of God; and so understand the latter end.
Surely thou hast appointed judgments to them because of their crafty dealings: thou hast cast them down when they were lifted up.
How have they become desolate! suddenly they have failed: they have perished because of their iniquity.
As the dream of one awakening, O Lord, in thy city thou wilt despise their image.
For my heart has rejoiced, and my reins have been gladdened.
But I was vile and knew not: I became brutish before thee.
Yet I am continually with thee: thou hast holden my right hand.
Thou hast guided me by thy counsel, and thou hast taken me to thyself with glory.
For what have I in heaven but thee? and what have I desired upon the earth beside thee?
My heart and my flesh have failed: but God is the strength of my heart, and God is my portion for ever.
For, behold, they that remove themselves far from thee shall perish: thou hast destroyed every one that goes a whoring from thee.
But it is good for me to cleave close to God, to put my trust in the Lord; that I may proclaim all thy praises in the gates of the daughter of Sion.
I will give thee thanks, O Lord, with my whole heart; and I will sing psalms to thee before the angels; for thou hast heard all the words of my mouth.
I will worship toward thy holy temple, and give thanks to thy name, on account of thy mercy and thy truth; for thou hast magnified thy holy name above every thing.
In whatsoever day I shall call upon thee, hear me speedily; thou shalt abundantly provide me with thy power in my soul.
Let all the kings of the earth, o Lord, give thanks unto thee; for they have heard all the words of thy mouth.
And let them sing in the ways of the Lord; for great is the glory of the Lord.
For the Lord is high, and yet regards the lowly; and he knows high things from afar off.
Though I should walk in the midst of affliction, thou wilt quicken me; thou hast stretched forth thine hands against the wrath of mine enemies, and thy right hand has saved me.
O Lord, thou shalt recompense them on my behalf: thy mercy, O Lord, endures for ever: overlook not the works of thine hands.
And it shall come to pass, if thou wilt indeed hear the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe and do all these commands, which I charge thee this day, that the Lord thy God shall set thee on high above all the nations of the earth;
and all these blessings shall come upon thee, and shall find thee. If thou wilt indeed hear the voice of the Lord thy God,
blessed shalt thou be in the city, and blessed shalt thou be in the field.
Blessed shall be the offspring of thy body, and the fruits of thy land, and the herds of thy oxen, and the flocks of thy sheep.
Blessed shall be thy barns, and thy stores.
Blessed shalt thou be in thy coming in, and blessed shalt thou be in thy going out.
The Lord raise thee up for himself a holy people, as he sware to thy fathers; if thou wilt hear the voice of the Lord thy God, and walk in all his ways.
And all the nations of the earth shall see thee, that the name of the Lord is called upon thee, and they shall stand in awe of thee.
And the Lord thy God shall multiply thee for good in the offspring of thy body, and in the offspring of thy cattle, and in the fruits of thy land, on thy land which the Lord sware to thy fathers to give to thee.
May the Lord open to thee his good treasure, the heaven, to give rain to thy land in season: may he bless all the works of thy hands: so shalt thou lend to many nations, but thou shalt not borrow; and thou shalt rule over many nations, but they shall not rule over thee.
Thou shalt not turn aside from any of the commandments, which I charge thee this day, to the right hand or to the left, to go after other gods to serve them.
But it shall come to pass, if thou wilt not hearken to the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe all his commandments, as many as I charge thee this day, then all these curses shall come on thee, and overtake thee.
Cursed shalt thou be in the city, and cursed shalt thou be in the field.
Cursed shall be thy barns and thy stores.
Cursed shall be the offspring of thy body, and the fruits of thy land, the herds of thine oxen, and the flocks of thy sheep.
Cursed shalt thou be in thy coming in, and cursed shalt thou be in thy going out.
The Lord send upon thee want, and famine, and consumption of all things on which thou shalt put thy hand, until he shall have utterly destroyed thee, and until he shall have consumed thee quickly because of thine evil devices, because thou hast forsaken me.
The Lord cause the pestilence to cleave to thee, until he shall have consumed thee off the land into which thou goest to inherit it.
The Lord smite thee with distress, and fever, and cold, and inflammation, and blighting, and paleness, and they shall pursue thee until they have destroyed thee.
And thou shalt have over thine head a sky of brass, and the earth under thee shall be iron.
The Lord thy God make the rain of thy land dust; and dust shall come down from heaven, until it shall have destroyed thee, and until it shall have quickly consumed thee.
The Lord give thee up for slaughter before thine enemies: thou shalt go out against them one way, and flee from their face seven ways; and thou shalt be a dispersion in all the kingdoms of the earth.
And your dead men shall be food to the birds of the sky, and to the beasts of the earth; and there shall be none to scare them away.
The Lord smite thee with the botch of Egypt in the seat, and with a malignant scab, and itch, so that thou canst not be healed.
The Lord smite thee with insanity, and blindness, and astonishment of mind.
And thou shalt grope at mid-day, as a blind man would grope in the darkness, and thou shalt not prosper in thy ways; and then thou shalt be unjustly treated, and plundered continually, and there shall be no helper.
thou shalt take a wife, and another man shall have her; thou shalt build a house, and thou shalt not dwell in it; thou shalt plant a vineyard, and shalt not gather the grapes of it.
Thy calf shall be slain before thee, and thou shalt not eat of it; thine ass shall be violently taken away from thee, and shall not be restored to thee: thy sheep shall be given to thine enemies, and thou shalt have no helper.
Thy sons and thy daughters shall be given to another nation, and thine eyes wasting away shall look for them: thine hand shall have no strength.
A nation which thou knowest not shall eat the produce of thy land, and all thy labours; and thou shalt be injured and crushed always.
And thou shalt be distracted, because of the sights of thine eyes which thou shalt see.
The Lord smite thee with an evil sore, on the knees and the legs, so that thou shalt not be able to be healed from the sole of thy foot to the crown of thy head.
The Lord carry away thee and thy princes, whom thou shalt set over thee, to a nation which neither thou nor thy fathers know; and thou shalt there serve other gods, wood and stone.
An thou shalt be there for a wonder, and a parable, and a tale, among all the nations, to which the Lord thy God shall carry thee away.
Thou shalt carry forth much seed into the field, and thou shalt bring in little, because the locust shall devour it.
Thou shalt plant a vineyard, and dress it, and shalt not drink the wine, neither shalt thou delight thyself with it, because the worm shall devour it.
Thou shalt have olive trees in all thy borders, and thou shalt not anoint thee with oil, because thine olive shall utterly cast its fruit.
Thou shalt beget sons and daughters, and they shall not be thine, for they shall depart into captivity.
All thy trees and the fruits of thy land shall the blight consume.
The stranger that is within thee shall get up very high, and thou shalt come down very low.
He shall lend to thee, and thou shalt not lend to him: he shall be the head, and thou shalt be the tail.
And all these curses shall come upon thee, and shall pursue thee, and shall overtake thee, until he shall have consumed thee, and until he shall have destroyed thee; because thou didst not hearken to the voice of the Lord thy God, to keep his commands, and his ordinances which he has commanded thee.
And these things shall be signs in thee, and wonders among thy seed for ever;
because thou didst not serve the Lord thy God with gladness and a good heart, because of the abundance of all things.
And thou shalt serve thine enemies, which the Lord will send forth against thee, in hunger, and in thirst, and in nakedness, and in the want of all things; and thou shalt wear upon thy neck a yoke of iron until he shall have destroyed thee.
The Lord shall bring upon thee a nation from the extremity of the earth, like the swift flying of an eagle, a nation whose voice thou shalt not understand;
a nation bold in countenance, which shall not respect the person of the aged and shall not pity the young.
And it shall eat up the young of thy cattle, and the fruits of thy land, so as not to leave to thee corn, wine, oil, the herds of thine oxen, and the flocks of thy sheep, until it shall have destroyed thee;
and have utterly crushed thee in thy cities, until the high and strong walls be destroyed, in which thou trustest, in all thy land; and it shall afflict thee in thy cities, which he has given to thee.
And thou shalt eat the fruit of thy body, the flesh of thy sons and of thy daughters, all that he has given thee, in thy straitness and thy affliction, with which thine enemy shall afflict thee.
He that is tender and very delicate within thee shall look with an evil eye upon his brother, and the wife in his bosom, and the children that are left, which may have been left to him;
so as not to give to one of them of the flesh of his children, whom he shall eat, because of his having nothing left him in thy straitness, and in thy affliction, with which thine enemies shall afflict thee in all thy cities.
And she that is tender and delicate among you, whose foot has not assayed to go upon the earth for delicacy and tenderness, shall look with an evil eye on her husband in her bosom, and her son and her daughter,
and her offspring that comes out between her feet, and the child which she shall bear; for she shall eat them because of the want of all things, secretly in thy straitness, and in thy affliction, with which thine enemy shall afflict thee in thy cities.
If thou wilt not hearken to do all the words of this law, which have been written in this book, to fear this glorious and wonderful name, the Lord thy God;
then the Lord shall magnify thy plagues, and the plagues of thy seed, great and wonderful plagues, and evil and abiding diseases.
And he shall bring upon thee all the evil pain of Egypt, of which thou wast afraid, and they shall cleave to thee.
And the Lord shall bring upon thee every sickness, and every plague that is not written, and every one that is written in the book of this law, until he shall have destroyed thee.
And ye shall be left few in number, whereas ye were as the stars of the sky in multitude; because thou didst not hearken to the voice of the Lord thy God.
And it shall come to pass that as the Lord rejoiced over you to do you good, and to multiply you, so the Lord will rejoice over you to destroy you; and ye shall be quickly removed from the land, into which ye go to inherit it.
And the Lord thy God shall scatter thee among all nations, from one end of the earth to the other; and thou shalt there serve other gods, wood and stone, which thou hast not known, nor thy fathers.
Moreover among those nations he will not give thee quiet, neither by any means shall the sole of thy foot have rest; and the Lord shall give thee there another and a misgiving heart, and failing eyes, and a wasting soul.
And thy life shall be in suspense before thine eyes; and thou shalt be afraid by day and by night, and thou shalt have no assurance of thy life.
In the morning thou shalt say, Would it were evening! and in the evening thou shalt say, Would it were morning! for the fear of thine heart with which thou shalt fear, and for the sights of thine eyes which thou shalt see.
And the Lord shall bring thee back to Egypt in ships, by the way of which I said, Thou shalt not see it again; and ye shall be sold there to your enemies for bondmen and bondwomen, and none shall buy you.
The word which came to Esaias the son of Amos concerning Judea, and concerning Jerusalem.
For in the last days the mountain of the Lord shall be glorious, and the house of God shall be on the top of the mountains, and it shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall come to it.
And many nations shall go and say, Come, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will tell us his way, and we will walk in it: for out of Sion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord out of Jerusalem.
And he shall judge among the nations, and shall rebuke many people: and they shall beat their swords into plow-shares, and their spears into sickles: and nation shall not take up sword against nation, neither shall they learn to war any more.
And now, O house of Jacob, come, and let us walk in the light of the Lord.
For he has forsaken his people the house of Israel, because their land is filled as at the beginning with divinations, as the land of the Philistines, and many strange children were born to them.
For their land is filled with silver and gold, and there was no number of their treasures; their land also is filled with horses, and there was no number of chariots.
And the land is filled with abominations, even the works of their hands; and they have worshipped the works which their fingers made.
And the mean man bowed down, and the great man was humbled: and I will not pardon them.
Now therefore enter ye into the rocks, and hide yourselves in the earth, for fear of the Lord, and by reason of the glory of his might, when he shall arise to strike terribly the earth.
For the eyes of the Lord are high, but man is low; and the haughtiness of men shall be brought low, and the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day.
For the day of the Lord of hosts shall be upon every one that is proud and haughty, and upon every one that is high and towering, and they shall be brought down;
and upon every cedar of Libanus, of them that are high and towering, and upon every oak of Basan,
and upon every high mountain, and upon every high hill,
and upon every high tower, and upon every high wall,
and upon every ship of the sea, and upon every display of fine ships.
And every man shall be brought low, and the pride of men shall fall: and the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day.
And they shall hide all idols made with hands,
having carried them into the caves, and into the clefts of the rocks, and into the caverns of the earth, for fear of the Lord, and by reason of the glory of his might, when he shall arise to strike terribly the earth.
For in that day a man shall cast forth his silver and gold abominations, which they made in order to worship vanities and bats;
to enter into the caverns of the solid rock, and into the clefts of the rocks, for fear of the Lord, and by reason of the glory of his might, when he shall arise to strike terribly the earth.
And Jephthae the Galaadite was a mighty man; and he was the son of a harlot, who bore Jephthae to Galaad.
And the wife of Galaad bore him sons; and the sons of his wife grew up, and they cast out Jephthae, and said to him, Thou shalt not inherit in the house of our father, for thou art the son of a concubine.
And Jephthae fled from the face of his brethren, and dwelt in the land of Tob; and vain men gathered to Jephthae, and went out with him.
And it came to pass when the children of Ammon prepared to fight with Israel,
that the elders of Galaad went to fetch Jephthae from the land of 67.
And they said to Jephthae, Come, and be our head, and we will fight with the sons of Ammon.
And Jephthae said to the elders of Galaad, Did ye not hate me, and cast me out of my father's house, and banish me from you? and wherefore are ye come to me now when ye want me?
And the elders of Galaad said to Jephthae, Therefore have we now turned to thee, that thou shouldest go with us, and fight against the sons of Ammon, and be our head over all the inhabitants of Galaad.
And Jephthae said to the elders of Galaad, If ye turn me back to fight with the children of Ammon, and the Lord should deliver them before me, then will I be your head.
And the elders of Galaad said to Jephthae, The Lord be witness between us, if we shall not do according to thy word.
And Jephthae went with the elders of Galaad, and the people made him head and ruler over them: and Jephthae spoke all his words before the Lord in Massepha.
And Jephthae sent messengers to the king of the children of Ammon, saying, What have I to do with thee, that thou hast come against me to fight in my land?
And the king of the children of Ammon said to the messengers of Jephthae, Because Israel took my land when he went up out of Egypt, from Arnon to Jaboc, and to Jordan: now then return them peaceably and I will depart.
And Jephthae again sent messengers to the king of the children of Ammon,
and said to him, Thus says Jephthae, Israel took not the land of Moab, nor the land of the children of Ammon;
for in their going up out of Egypt Israel went in the wilderness as far as the sea of Siph, and came to Cades.
And Israel sent messengers to the king of Edom, saying, I will pass, if it please thee, by thy land: and the king of Edom complied not: and Israel also sent to the king of Moab, and he did not consent; and Israel sojourned in Cades.
And they journeyed in the wilderness, and compassed the land of Edom and the land of Moab: and they came by the east of the land of Moab, an encamped in the country beyond Arnon, and came not within the borders of Moab, for Arnon is the border of Moab.
And Israel sent messengers to Seon king of the Amorite, king of Esbon, and Israel said to him, Let us pass, we pray thee, by thy land to our place.
And Seon did not trust Israel to pass by his coast; and Seon gathered all his people, and they encamped at Jasa; and he set the battle in array against Israel.
And the Lord God of Israel delivered Seon and all his people into the hand of Israel, and they smote him; and Israel inherited all the land of the Amorite who dwelt in that land,
from Arnon and to Jaboc, and from the wilderness to Jordan.
And now the Lord God of Israel has removed the Amorite from before his people Israel, and shalt thou inherit his land?
Wilt thou not inherit those possessions which Chamos thy god shall cause thee to inherit; and shall not we inherit the land of all those whom the Lord our God has removed from before you?
And now art thou any better than Balac son of Sepphor, king of Moab? did he indeed fight with Israel, or indeed make war with him,
when Israel dwelt in Esebon and in its coasts, and in the land of Aroer and in its coasts, and in all the cities by Jordan, three hundred years? and wherefore didst thou not recover them in that time?
And now I have not sinned against thee, but thou wrongest me in preparing war against me: may the Lord the Judge judge this day between the children of Israel and the children of Ammon.
But the king of the children of Ammon hearkened not to the words of Jephthae, which he sent to him.
And the spirit of the Lord came upon Jephthae, and he passed over Galaad, and Manasse, and passed by the watch-tower of Galaad to the other side of the children of Ammon.
And Jephthae vowed a vow to the Lord, and said, If thou wilt indeed deliver the children of Ammon into my hand,
then it shall come to pass that whosoever shall first come out of the door of my house to meet me when I return in peace from the children of Ammon, he shall be the Lord's: I will offer him up for a whole-burnt-offering.
And Jephthae advanced to meet the sons of Ammon to fight against them; and the Lord delivered them into his hand.
And he smote them from Aroer till one comes to Arnon, in number twenty cities, and as far as Ebelcharmim, with a very great destruction: and the children of Ammon were straitened before the children of Israel.
And Jephthae came to Massepha to his house; and behold, his daughter came forth to meet him with timbrels and dances; and she was his only child, he had not another son or daughter.
And it came to pass when he saw her, that he rent his garments, and said, Ah, ah, my daughter, thou hast indeed troubled me, and thou wast the cause of my trouble; and I have opened my mouth against thee to the Lord, and I shall not be able to return from it.
And she said to him, Father, hast thou opened thy mouth to the Lord? Do to me accordingly as the word went out of thy mouth, in that the Lord has wrought vengeance for thee on thine enemies of the children of Ammon.
And she said to her father, Let my father now do this thing: let me alone for two months, and I will go up and down on the mountains, and I will bewail my virginity, I and my companions.
And he said, Go: and he sent her away for two months; and she went, and her companions, and she bewailed her virginity on the mountains.
And it came to pass at the end of the two months that she returned to her father; and he performed upon her his vow which he vowed; and she knew no man:
and it was an ordinance in Israel, That the daughters of Israel went from year to year to bewail the daughter of Jephthae the Galaadite for four days in a year.
And it came to pass after this that Abessalom prepared for himself chariots and horses, and fifty men to run before him.
And Abessalom rose early, and stood by the side of the way of the gate: and it came to pass that every man who had a cause, came to the king for judgment, and Abessalom cried to him, and said to him, Of what city art thou? And he said, Thy servant is of one of the tribes of Israel.
And Abessalom said to him, See, thy affairs are right and clear, yet thou hast no one appointed of the king to hear thee.
And Abessalom said, O that one would make me a judge in the land; then every man who had a dispute or a cause would come to me, and I would judge him!
And it came to pass when a man came near to do him obeisance, that he stretched out his hand, and took hold of him, and kissed him.
And Abessalom did after this manner to all Israel that came to the king for judgment; and Abessalom gained the hearts of the men of Israel.
And it came to pass after forty years, that Abessalom said to his father, I will go now, and pay my vows, which I vowed to the Lord in Chebron.
For thy servant vowed a vow when I dwelt at Gedsur in Syria, saying, If the Lord should indeed restore me to Jerusalem, then will I serve the Lord.
And the king said to him, Go in peace. And he arose and went to Chebron.
And Abessalom sent spies throughout all the tribes of Israel, saying, When ye hear the sound of the trumpet, then shall ye say, Abessalom is become king in Chebron.
And there went with Abessalom two hundred chosen men from Jerusalem; and they went in their simplicity, and knew not anything.
And Abessalom sent to Achitophel the Theconite, the counsellor of David, from his city, from Gola, where he was sacrificing: and there was a strong conspiracy; and the people with Abessalom were increasingly numerous.
And there came a messenger to David, saying, the heart of the men of Israel is gone after Abessalom.
And David said to all his servants who were with him in Jerusalem, Rise, and let us flee, for we have no refuge from Abessalom: make haste and go, lest he overtake us speedily, and bring evil upon us, and smite the city with the edge of the sword.
And the king's servants said to the king, In all things which our lord the king chooses, behold we are thy servants.
And the king and all his house went out on foot: and the king left ten women of his concubines to keep the house.
And the king and all his servants went out on foot; and abode in a distant house.
And all his servants passed on by his side, and every Chelethite, and every Phelethite, and they stood by the olive tree in the wilderness: and all the people marched near him, and all his court, and all the men of might, and all the men of war, six hundred: and they were present at his side: and every Chelethite, and every Phelethite, and all the six hundred Gittites that came on foot out of Geth, and they went on before the king.
And the king said to Ethi, the Gittite, Why dost thou also go with us? return, and dwell with the king, for thou art a stranger, and thou has come forth as a sojourner out of thy place.
Whereas thou camest yesterday, shall I to-day cause thee to travel with us, and shalt thou thus change thy place? thou didst come forth yesterday, and to-day shall I set thee in motion to go along with us? I indeed will go whithersoever I may go: return then, and cause thy brethren to return with thee, and may the Lord deal mercifully and truly with thee.
And it was reported to David, saying, Achitophel also is among the conspirators with Abessalom. And David said, O Lord my God, disconcert, I pray thee, the counsel of Achitophel.
And David came as far as Ros, where he worshipped God: and behold, Chusi the chief friend of David came out to meet him, having rent his garment, and earth was upon his head.
And David said to him, If thou shouldest go over with me, then wilt thou be a burden to me;
but if thou shall return to the city, and shalt say to Abessalom, Thy brethren are passed over, and the king thy father is passed over after me: and now I am thy servant, O king, suffer me to live: at one time even of late I was the servant of thy father, and now I am thy humble servantso shalt thou disconcert for me, the counsel of Achitophel.
And, behold, there are there with thee Sadoc and Abiathar the priests; and it shall be that every word that thou shalt hear of the house of the king, thou shalt report it to Sadoc and Abiathar the priests.
Behold, there are there with them their two sons, Achimaas the son of Sadoc, and Jonathan the son of Abiathar; and by them ye shall report to me every word which ye shall hear.
So Chusi the friend of David went into the city, and Abessalom was lately gone into Jerusalem.
And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the children of Israel, and take rods of them, according to the houses of their families, a rod from all their princes, according to the houses of their families, twelve rods, and write the name of each on his rod.
And write the name of Aaron on the rod of Levi; for it is one rod for each: they shall give them according to the tribe of the house of their families.
And thou shalt put them in the tabernacle of witness, before the testimony, where I will be made known to thee.
And it shall be, the man whom I shall choose, his rod shall blossom; and I will remove from me the murmuring of the children of Israel, which they murmur against you.
And Moses spoke to the children of Israel, and all their chiefs gave him a rod each, for one chief a rod, according to the house of their families, twelve rods; and the rod of Aaron was in the midst of the rods.
And Moses laid up the rods before the Lord in the tabernacle of witness.
And it came to pass on the morrow, that Moses and Aaron went into the tabernacle of witness; and, behold, the rod of Aaron for the house of Levi blossomed, and put forth a bud, and bloomed blossoms and produced almonds.
And Moses brought forth all the rods from before the Lord to all the sons of Israel; and they looked, and each one took his rod.
And the Lord said to Moses, Lay up the rod of Aaron before the testimonies to be kept as a sign for the children of the disobedient; and let their murmuring cease from me, and they shall not die.
And Moses and Aaron did as the Lord commanded Moses, so did they.
And the children of Israel spoke to Moses, saying, Behold, we are cut off, we are destroyed, we are consumed.
Every one that touches the tabernacle of the Lord, dies: shall we die utterly?
And the Lord visited Sarrha, as he said, and the Lord did to Sarrha, as he spoke.
And she conceived and bore to Abraam a son in old age, at the set time according as the Lord spoke to him.
And Abraam called the name of his son that was born to him, whom Sarrha bore to him, Isaac.
And Abraam circumcised Isaac on the eighth day, as God commanded him.
And the child grew and was weaned, and Abraam made a great feast the day that his son Isaac was weaned.
And Sarrha having seen the son of Agar the Egyptian who was born to Abraam, sporting with Isaac her son,
then she said to Abraam, Cast out this bondwoman and her son, for the son of this bondwoman shall not inherit with my son Isaac.
But the word appeared very hard before Abraam concerning his son.
And Abimelech said to him, I know not who has done this thing to thee, neither didst thou tell it me, neither heard I it but only to-day.
And Abraam took sheep and calves, and gave them to Abimelech, and both made a covenant.
And Abraam set seven ewe-lambs by themselves.
And Abimelech said to Abraam, What are these seven ewe-lambs which thou hast set alone?
And they made a covenant at the well of the oath. And there rose up Abimelech, Ochozath his friend, and Phichol the commander-in-chief of his army, and they returned to the land of the Phylistines.
And Abraam planted a field at the well of the oath, and called there on the name of the Lord, the everlasting God.
And Abraam sojourned in the land of the Phylistines many days.
O Lord, I have cried to thee; hear me: attend to the voice of my supplication, when I cry to thee.
Let my prayer be set forth before thee as incense; the lifting up of my hands as an evening sacrifice.
Set a watch, O Lord, on my mouth, and a strong door about by lips.
Incline not my heart to evil things, to employ pretexts for sins, with me who work iniquity: and I will not. let me not unite with their choice ones.
The righteous shall chasten me with mercy, and reprove me: but let not the oil of the sinner anoint my head: for yet shall my prayer also be in their pleasures.
Their mighty ones have been swallowed up near the rock: they shall hear my words, for they are sweet.
As a lump of earth is crushed upon the ground, our bones have been scattered by the mouth of the grave.
For mine eyes are to thee, O Lord God: I have hoped in thee; take not away my life.
Keep me from the snare which they have set for me, and from the stumbling blocks of them that work iniquity.
Sinners shall fall by their own net: I am alone until I shall escape.
Thou shalt not receive a vain report: thou shalt not agree with the unjust man to become an unjust witness.
Thou shalt not associate with the multitude for evil; thou shalt not join thyself with a multitude to turn aside with the majority so as to shut out judgment.
And thou shalt not spare a poor man in judgment.
And if thou meet thine enemy's ox or his ass going astray, thou shalt turn them back and restore them to him.
And if thou see thine enemy's ass fallen under its burden, thou shalt not pass by it, but shalt help to raise it with him.
Thou shalt not wrest the sentence of the poor in his judgment.
Thou shalt abstain from every unjust thing: thou shalt not slay the innocent and just, and thou shalt not justify the wicked for gifts.
And thou shalt not receive gifts; for gifts blind the eyes of the seeing, and corrupt just words.
And ye shall not afflict a stranger, for ye know the heart of a stranger; for ye were yourselves strangers in the land of Egypt.
Six years thou shalt sow thy land, and gather in the fruits of it.
But in the seventh year thou shalt let it rest, and leave it, and the poor of thy nation shall feed; and the wild beasts of the field shall eat that which remains: thus shalt thou do to thy vineyard and to thine oliveyard.
Six days shalt thou do thy works, and on the seventh day there shall be rest, that thine ox and thine ass may rest, and that the son of thy maid-servant and the stranger may be refreshed.
Observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you; and ye shall make no mention of the name of other gods, neither shall they be heard out of your mouth.
Keep ye a feast to me three times in the year.
Take heed to keep the feast of unleavened bread: seven days ye shall eat unleavened bread, as I charged thee at the season of the month of new corn, for in it thou camest out of Egypt: thou shalt not appear before me empty.
And thou shalt keep the feast of the harvest of first-fruits of thy labours, whatsoever thou shalt have sown in thy field, and the feast of completion at the end of the year in the gathering in of thy fruits out of thy field.
Three times in the year shall all thy males appear before the Lord thy God.
For when I shall have cast out the nations from before thee, and shall have widened thy borders, thou shalt not offer the blood of my sacrifice with leaven, neither must the fat of my feast abide till the morning.
Thou shalt bring the first-offerings of the first-fruits of thy land into the house of the Lord thy God. Thou shalt not seethe a lamb in its mother's milk.
And, behold, I send my angel before thy face, that he may keep thee in the way, that he may bring thee into the land which I have prepared for thee.
Take heed to thyself and hearken to him, and disobey him not; for he will not give way to thee, for my name is on him.
If ye will indeed hear my voice, and if thou wilt do all the things I shall charge thee with, and keep my covenant, ye shall be to me a peculiar people above all nations, for the whole earth is mine; and ye shall be to me a royal priesthood, and a holy nation: these words shall ye speak to the children of Israel, If ye shall indeed hear my voice, and do all the things I shall tell thee, I will be an enemy to thine enemies, and an adversary to thine adversaries.
For my angel shall go as thy leader, and shall bring thee to the Amorite, and Chettite, and Pherezite, and Chananite, and Gergesite, and Evite, and Jebusite, and I will destroy them.
Thou shalt not worship their gods, nor serve them: thou shalt not do according to their works, but shalt utterly destroy them, and break to pieces their pillars.
And thou shalt serve the Lord thy God, and I will bless thy bread and thy wine and thy water, and I will turn away sickness from you.
There shall not be on thy land one that is impotent or barren. I will surely fulfil the number of thy days.
And I will send terror before thee, and I will strike with amazement all the nations to which thou shalt come, and I will make all thine enemies to flee.
And I will send hornets before thee, and thou shalt cast out the Amorites and the Evites, and the Chananites and the Chettites from thee.
I will not cast them out in one year, lest the land become desolate, and the beasts of the field multiply against thee.
By little and little I will cast them out from before thee, until thou shalt be increased and inherit the earth.
And I will set thy borders from the Red Sea, to the sea of the Phylistines, and from the wilderness to the great river Euphrates; and I will give into your hand those that dwell in the land, and will cast them out from thee.
Thou shalt make no covenant with them and their gods.
And they shall not dwell in thy land, lest they cause thee to sin against me; for if thou shouldest serve their gods, these will be an offence to thee.
I saw the Lord standing on the altar: and he said, Smite the mercy-seat, and the porch shall be shaken: and cut through into the heads of all; and I will slay the remnant of them with the sword: no one of them fleeing shall escape, and no one of them, striving to save himself shall be delivered.
Though they hid themselves in hell, thence shall my hand drag them forth; and though they go up to heaven, thence will I bring them down.
If they hide themselves in the top of Carmel, thence will I search them out and take them; and if they should go down from my presence into the depths of the sea, there will I command the serpent, and he shall bite them.
And if they should go into captivity before the face of their enemies, there will I command the sword, and it shall slay them: and I will set mine eyes against them for evil, and not for good.
And the Lord, the Lord God Almighty, is he that takes hold of the land, and causes it to shake, and all that inhabit it shall mourn; and its destruction shall go up as a river, and shall descend as the river of Egypt.
It is he that builds his ascent up to the sky, and establishes his promise on the earth; who calls the water of the sea, and pours it out on the face of the earth; the Lord Almighty is his name.
Are not ye to me as the sons of the Ethiopians, O children of Israel? saith the Lord. Did I not bring Israel up out of the land of Egypt, and the Philistines from Cappadocia, and the Syrians out of the deep?
Behold, the eyes of the Lord God are upon the kingdom of sinners, and I will cut it off from the face of the earth; only I will not utterly cut off the house of Jacob, saith the Lord.
For I will give commandment, and sift the house of Israel among all the Gentiles, as corn is sifted in a sieve, and yet a fragment shall not in any wise fall upon the earth.
All the sinners of my people shall die by the sword, who say, Calamities shall certainly not draw near, nor come upon us.
In that day I will raise up the tabernacle of David that is fallen, and will rebuild the ruins of it, and will set up the parts thereof that have been broken down, and will build it up as in the ancient days:
that the remnant of men, and all the Gentiles upon whom my name is called, may earnestly seek me, saith the Lord who does all these things.
Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, when the harvest shall overtake the vintage, and the grapes shall ripen at seedtime; and the mountains shall drop sweet wine, and all the hills shall be planted.
And I will turn the captivity of my people Israel, and they shall rebuild the ruined cities, and shall inhabit them; and they shall plant vineyards, and shall drink the wine from them; and they shall form gardens, and eat the fruit of them.
And I will plant them on their land, and they shall no more be plucked up from the land which I have given them, saith the Lord God Almighty.
Hearken to my words, O Lord, attend to my cry.
Attend to the voice of my supplication, my King, and my God: for to thee, O Lord, will I pray.
In the morning thou shalt hear my voice: in the morning will I wait upon thee, and will look up.
For thou art not a god that desires iniquity; neither shall the worker of wickedness dwell with thee.
Neither shall the transgressors continue in thy sight: thou hatest, O Lord, all them that work iniquity.
Thou wilt destroy all that speak falsehood: the Lord abhors the bloody and deceitful man.
But I will enter into thine house in the multitude of thy mercy: I will worship in thy fear toward thy holy temple.
Lead me, O Lord, in thy righteousness because of mine enemies; make my way plain before thy face.
For there is no truth in their mouth; their heart is vain; their throat is an open sepulchre; with their tongues they have used deceit.
Judge them, O God; let them fail of their counsels: cast them out according to the abundance of their ungodliness; for they have provoked thee, O Lord.
But let all that trust on thee be glad in thee: they shall exult for ever, and thou shalt dwell among them; and all that love thy name shall rejoice in thee.
For thou, Lord, shalt bless the righteous: thou hast compassed us as with a shield of favour.
And it came to pass on a certain day, that the angels of God came to stand before the Lord, and the devil came among them to stand before the Lord.
And the Lord, said to the devil, Whence comest thou? Then the devil said before the Lord, I am come from going through the world, and walking about the whole earth.
And the Lord said to the devil, Hast thou then observed my servant Job, that there is none of men upon the earth like him, a harmless, true, blameless, godly man, abstaining from all evil? and he yet cleaves to innocence, whereas thou has told me to destroy his substance without cause?
And the devil answered and said to the Lord, Skin for skin, all that a man has will he give as a ransom for his life.
Nay, but put forth thine hand, and touch his bones and his flesh: verily he will bless thee to thy face.
And the Lord said to the devil, Behold, I deliver him up to thee; only save his life.
So the devil went out from the Lord, and smote Job with sore boils from his feet to his head.
And he took a potsherd to scrape away the discharge, and sat upon a dung-heap outside the city.
And when much time had passed, his wife said to him, How long wilt thou hold out, saying, Behold, I wait yet a little while, expecting the hope of my deliverance? for, behold, thy memorial is abolished from the earth, even thy sons and daughters, the pangs and pains of my womb which I bore in vain with sorrows; and thou thyself sittest down to spend the nights in the open air among the corruption of worms, and I am a wanderer and a servant from place to place and house to house, waiting for the setting of the sun, that I may rest from my labours and my pangs which now beset me: but say some word against the Lord, and die.
But he looked on her, and said to her, Thou hast spoken like one of the foolish women. If we have received good things of the hand of the Lord, shall we not endure evil things? In all these things that happened to him, Job sinned not at all with his lips before God.
Now his three friends having heard of all the evil that was come upon him, came to him each from his own country: Eliphaz the king of the Thaemans, Baldad sovereign of the Saucheans, Sophar king of he Minaeans: and they came to him with one accord, to comfort and to visit him.
And when they saw him from a distance they did not know him; and they cried with a loud voice, and wept, and rent every one his garment, and sprinkled dust upon their heads,
and they sat down beside him seven days and seven nights, and no one of them spoke; for they saw that his affliction was dreadful and very great.
Let my kinsman come down into his garden, and eat the fruit of his choice berries. I am come into my garden, my sister, my spouse: I have gathered my myrrh with my spices; I have eaten my bread with my honey; I have drunk my wine with my milk. Eat, O friends, and drink; yea, brethren, drink abundantly.
I sleep, but my heart is awake: the voice of my kinsman knocks at the door, saying, Open, open to me, my companion, my sister, my dove, my perfect one: for my head is filled with dew, and my locks with the drops of the night.
I have put off my coat; how shall I put it on? I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them?
My kinsman put forth his hand by the hole of the door, and my belly moved for him.
I rose up to open to my kinsman; my hands dropped myrrh, my fingers choice myrrh, on the handles of the lock.
I opened to my kinsman; my kinsman was gone: my soul failed at his speech: I sought him, but found him not; I called him, but he answered me not.
The watchman that go their rounds in the city found me, they smote me, they wounded me; the keepers of the walls took away my veil from me.
I have charged you, O daughters of Jerusalem, by the powers and the virtues of the field: if ye should find my kinsman, what are ye to say to him? That I am wounded with love.
What is thy kinsman more than another kinsman, O thou beautiful among women? what is thy kinsman more than another kinsman, that thou hast so charged us?
My kinsman is white and ruddy, chosen out from myriads.
His head is as very fine gold, his locks are flowing, black as a raven.
His eyes are as doves, by the pools of waters, washed with milk, sitting by the pools.
His cheeks are as bowls of spices pouring forth perfumes: his lips are lilies, dropping choice myrrh.
His hands are as turned gold set with beryl: his belly is an ivory tablet on a sapphire stone.
His legs are marble pillars set on golden sockets: his form is as Libanus, choice as the cedars.
His throat is most sweet, and altogether desirable. This is my kinsman, and this is my companion, O daughters of Jerusalem.
And the borders of the children of Joseph were from Jordan by Jericho eastward; and they will go up from Jericho to the hill country, to the wilderness, to Baethel Luza.
And they will go out to Baethel, and will proceed to the borders of Achatarothi.
And they will go across to the sea to the borders of Aptalim, as far as the borders of Baethoron the lower, and the going forth of them shall be to the sea.
And the sons of Joseph, Ephraim and Manasse, took their inheritance.
And the borders of the children of Ephraim were according to their families, and the borders of their inheritance were eastward to Ataroth, and Eroc as far as Baethoron the upper, and Gazara.
And the borders will proceed to the sea to Icasmon north of Therma; they will go round eastward to Thenasa, and Selles, and will pass on eastward to Janoca,
and to Macho, and Ataroth, and these are their villages; and they will come to Jericho, and will issue at Jordan.
And the borders will proceed from Tapho to the sea to Chelcana; and their termination will be at the sea; this is the inheritance of the tribe of Ephraim according to their families.
And the cities separated to the sons of Ephraim were in the midst of the inheritance of the sons of Manasse, all the cities and their villages.
And Ephraim did not destroy the Chananite who dwelt in Gazer; and the Chananite dwelt in Ephraim until this day, until Pharao the king of Egypt went up and took it, and burnt it with fire; and the Chananites, and Pherezites, and the dwellers in Gaza they destroyed, and Pharao gave them for a dowry to his daughter.
Give thanks to the Lord; for he is good: for his mercy endures for ever.
Let now the house of Israel say, that he is good: for his mercy endures for ever.
Let now the house of Aaron say, that he is good: for his mercy endures for ever.
Let now all that fear the Lord say, that he is good: for his mercy endures for ever.
I called on the Lord out of affliction: and he hearkened to me, so as to bring me into a wide place.
The Lord is my helper; and I will not fear what man shall do to me.
The Lord is my helper; and I shall see my desire upon mine enemies.
It is better to trust in the Lord than to trust in man.
It is better to hope in the Lord, than to hope in princes.
All nations compassed me about: but in the name of the Lord I repulsed them.
They completely compassed me about: but in the name of the Lord I repulsed them.
They compassed me about as bees do a honeycomb, and they burst into flame as fire among thorns: but in the name of the Lord I repulsed them.
I was thrust, and sorely shaken, that I might fall: but the Lord helped me.
The Lord is my strength and my song, and is become my salvation.
The voice of exultation and salvation is in the tabernacles of the righteous: the right hand of the Lord has wrought mightily.
The right hand of the Lord has exalted me: the right hand of the Lord has wrought powerfully.
I shall not die, but live, and recount the works of the Lord.
The Lord has chastened me sore: but he has not given me up to death.
Open to me the gates of righteousness: I will go into them, and give praise to the Lord.
This is the gate of the Lord: the righteous shall enter by it.
I will give thanks to thee; because thou hast heard me, and art become my salvation.
The stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the corner.
This has been done of the Lord; and it is wonderful in our eyes.
This is the day which the Lord has made: let us exult and rejoice in it.
O Lord, save now: O Lord, send now prosperity.
Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord: we have blessed you out of the house of the Lord.
God is the Lord, and he has shined upon us: celebrate the feast with thick branches, binding the victims even to the horns of the altar.
Thou art my God, and I will give thee thanks: thou art my God, and I will exalt thee. I will give thanks to thee, for thou hast heard me, and art become my salvation.
Give thanks to the Lord; for he is good: for his mercy endures for ever.
Ye shall observe to do all the commands which I charge you to-day, that ye may live and be multiplied, and enter in and inherit the land, which the Lord your God sware to give to your fathers.
And thou shalt remember all the way which the Lord thy God led thee in the wilderness, that he might afflict thee, and try thee, and that the things in thine heart might be made manifest, whether thou wouldest keep his commandments or no.
And he afflicted thee and straitened thee with hunger, and fed thee with manna, which thy fathers knew not; that he might teach thee that man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God shall man live.
Thy garments grew not old from off thee, thy shoes were not worn from off thee, thy feet were not painfully hardened, lo! these forty years.
And thou shalt know in thine heart, that as if any man should chasten his son, so the Lord thy God will chasten thee.
And thou shalt keep the commands of the Lord thy God, to walk in his ways, and to fear him.
For the Lord thy God will bring thee into a good and extensive land, where there are torrents of waters, and fountains of deep places issuing through the plains and through the mountains:
a land of wheat and barley, wherein are vines, figs, pomegranates; a land of olive oil and honey;
a land on which thou shalt not eat thy bread with poverty, and thou shalt not want any thing upon it; a land whose stones are iron, and out of its mountains thou shalt dig brass.
And thou shalt eat and be filled, and shalt bless the Lord thy God on the good land, which he has given thee.
Take heed to thyself that thou forget not the Lord thy God, so as not to keep his commands, and his judgments, and ordinances, which I command thee this day:
lest when thou hast eaten and art full, and hast built goodly houses, and dwelt in them;
and thy oxen and thy sheep are multiplied to thee, and thy silver and thy gold are multiplied to thee, and all thy possessions are multiplied to thee,
thou shouldest be exalted in heart, and forget the Lord thy God, who brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage:
who brought thee through that great and terrible wilderness, where is the biting serpent, and scorpion, and drought, where there was no water; who brought thee a fountain of water out of the flinty rock:
who fed thee with manna in the wilderness, which thou knewest not, and thy fathers knew not; that he might afflict thee, and thoroughly try thee, and do thee good in thy latter days.
Lest thou shouldest say in thine heart, My strength, and the power of mine hand have wrought for me this great wealth.
But thou shalt remember the Lord thy God, that he gives thee strength to get wealth; even that he may establish his covenant, which the Lord sware to thy fathers, as at this day.
And it shall come to pass if thou do at all forget the Lord thy God, and shouldest go after other gods, and serve them, and worship them, I call heaven and earth to witness against you this day, that ye shall surely perish.
As also the other nations which the Lord God destroys before your face, so shall ye perish, because ye hearkened not to the voice of the Lord your God.
THE WORD OF THE VALLEY OF SION. What has happened to thee, that now ye are all gone up to the housetops which help you not?
The city is filled with shouting men: thy slain are not slain with swords, nor are thy dead those who have died in battle.
All thy princes have fled, and thy captives are tightly bound, and the mighty men in thee have fled far away.
Therefore I said, Let me alone, I will weep bitterly; labour not to comfort me for the breach of the daughter of my people.
For it is a day of trouble, and of destruction, and of treading down, and there is perplexity sent from the Lord of hosts: they wander in the valley of Sion; they wander from the least to the greatest on the mountains.
And the Elamites took their quivers, and there were men mounted on horses, and there was a gathering for battle.
And it shall be that thy choice valleys shall be filled with chariots, and horsemen shall block up thy gates.
And they shall uncover the gates of Juda, and they shall look in that day on the choice houses of the city.
And they shall uncover the secret places of the houses of the citadel of David: and they saw that they were many, and that one had turned the water of the old pool into the city;
and that they had pulled down the houses of Jerusalem, to fortify the wall of the city.
And ye procured to yourselves water between the two walls within the ancient pool: but ye looked not to him that made it from the beginning, and regarded not him that created it.
And the Lord, the Lord of hosts, called in that day for weeping, and lamentation, and baldness, and for girding with sackcloth:
but they engaged in joy and gladness, slaying calves, and killing sheep, so as to eat flesh, and drink wine; saying, Let us eat and drink; for to-morrow we die.
And these things are revealed in the ears of the Lord of hosts: for this sin shall not be forgiven you, until ye die.
Thus saith the Lord of hosts, Go into the chamber, to Somnas the treasurer, and say to him, Why art thou here?
and what hast thou to do here, that thou hast here hewn thyself a sepulchre, and madest thyself a sepulchre on high, and hast graven for thyself a dwelling in the rock?
Behold now, the Lord of hosts casts forth and will utterly destroy such a man, and will take away thy robe and thy glorious crown,
and will cast thee into a great and unmeasured land, and there thou shalt die: and he will bring thy fair chariot to shame, and the house of thy prince to be trodden down.
And thou shalt be removed from thy stewardship, and from thy place.
And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will call my servant Eliakim the son of Chelcias:
and I will put on him thy robe, and I will grant him thy crown with power, and I will give thy stewardship into his hands: and he shall be as a father to them that dwell in Jerusalem, and to them that dwell in Juda.
And I will give him the glory of David; and he shall rule, and there shall be none to speak against him: and I will give him the key of the house of David upon his shoulder; and he shall open, and there shall be none to shut; and he shall shut, and there shall be none to open.
And I will make him a ruler in a sure place, and he shall be for a glorious throne of his father's house.
And every one that is glorious in the house of his father shall trust in him, from the least to the greatest; and they shall depend upon him in that day.
Thus saith the Lord of hosts, The man that is fastened in the sure place shall be removed and be taken away, and shall fall; and the glory that is upon him shall be utterly destroyed: for the Lord has spoken it.
For thus saith the Lord to Jacob; Rejoice ye, and exult over the head of the nations: make proclamation, and praise ye: say, The Lord has delivered his people, the remnant of Israel.
Behold, I bring them from the north, and will gather them from the end of the earth to the feast of the passover: and the people shall beget a great multitude, and they shall return hither.
They went forth with weeping, and I will bring them back with consolation, causing them to lodge by the channels of waters in a straight way, and they shall not err in it: for I am become a father to Israel, and Ephraim is my first-born.
Hear the words of the Lord, ye nations, and proclaim them to the islands afar off; say, He that scattered Israel will also gather him, and keep him as one that feeds his flock.
For the Lord has ransomed Jacob, he has rescued him out of the hand of them that were stronger than he.
And they shall come, and shall rejoice in the mount of Sion, and shall come to the good things of the Lord, even to a land of corn, and wine, and fruits, and cattle, and sheep: and their soul shall be as a fruitful tree; and they shall hunger no more.
Then shall the virgins rejoice in the assembly of youth, and the old men shall rejoice; and I will turn their mourning into joy, and will make them merry.
I will expand and cheer with wine the soul of the priests the sons of Levi, and my people shall be satisfied with my good things: thus saith the Lord.
In those days they shall certainly not say, The fathers ate a sour grape, and the children's teeth were set on edge.
But every one shall die in his own sin; and the teeth of him that eats the sour grape shall be set on edge.
Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, when I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Juda:
not according to the covenant which I made with their fathers in the day when I took hold of their hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt; for they abode not in my covenant, and I disregarded them, saith the Lord.
For this is my covenant which I will make with the house of Israel; after those days, saith the Lord, I will surely put my laws into their mind, and write them on their hearts; and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a people.
The fool has said in his heart, There is no God. They have corrupted themselves, and become abominable in iniquities: there is none that does good.
God looked down from heaven upon the sons of men, to see if there were any that understood, or sought after God.
They have all gone out of the way, they are together become unprofitable; there is none that does good, there is not even one.
Will none of the workers of iniquity know, who devour my people as they would eat bread? they have not called upon God. There were they greatly afraid, where there was no fear:
or God has scattered the bones of the men-pleasers; they were ashamed, for God despised them.
Who will bring the salvation of Israel out of Sion? When the Lord turns the captivity of his people, Jacob shall exult, and Israel shall be glad.
And these are the last words of David. Faithful is David the son of Jessae, and faithful the man whom the Lord raised up to be the anointed of the God of Jacob, and beautiful are the psalms of Israel.
The Spirit of the Lord spoke by me, and his word was upon my tongue.
The God of Israel says, A watchman out of Israel spoke to me a parable: I said among men, How will ye strengthen the fear of the anointed?
And in the morning light of God, let the sun arise in the morning, from the light of which the Lord passed on, and as it were from the rain of the tender grass upon the earth.
For my house is not so with the Mighty One: for he has made an everlasting covenant with me, ready, guarded at every time; for all my salvation and all my desire is, that the wicked should not flourish.
All these are as a thorn thrust forth, for they shall not be taken with the hand,
and a man shall not labour among them; and one shall have that which is fully armed with iron, and the staff of a spear, an he shall burn them with fire, and they shall be burnt in their shame.
These are the names of the mighty men of David: Jebosthe the Chananite is a captain of the third part: Adinon the Asonite, he drew his sword against eight hundred soldiers at once.
And after him Eleanan the son of his uncle, son of Dudi who was among the three mighty men with David; and when he defied the Philistines they were gathered there to war, and the men of Israel went up.
He arose an smote the Philistines, until his hand was weary, and his hand clave to the sword: and the Lord wrought a great salvation in that day, and the people rested behind him only to strip the slain.
And after him Samaia the son of Asa the Arachite: and the Philistines were gathered to Theria; and there was there a portion of ground full of lentiles; and the people fled before the Philistines.
And he stood firm in the midst of the portion, and rescued it, and smote the Philistines; and the Lord wrought a great deliverance.
And three out of the thirty went down, and came to Cason to David, to the cave of Odollam; and there was an army of the Philistines, and they encamped in the valley of Raphain.
And David was then in the strong hold, and the garrison of the Philistines was then in Bethleem.
And David longed, and said, Who will give me water to drink out of the well that is in Bethleem by the gate? now the band of the Philistines was then in Bethleem.
And the three mighty men broke through the host of the Philistines, and drew water out of the well that was in Bethleem in the gate: and they took it, and brought it to David, and he would not drink it, but poured it out before the Lord.
And he said, O Lord, forbid that I should do this, that I should drink of the blood of the men who went at the risk of their lives: and he would not drink it. These things did these three mighty men.
And Abessa the brother of Joab the son of Saruia, he was chief among the three, and he lifted up his spear against three hundred whom he slew; and he had a name among three.
Of those three he was most honourable, and he became a chief over them, but he reached not to the first three.
And Banaeas the son of Jodae, he was abundant in mighty deeds, from Cabeseel, and he smote the two sons of Ariel of Moab: and he went down and smote a lion in the midst of a pit on a snowy day.
He smote an Egyptian, a wonderful man, and in the hand of the Egyptian was a spear as the side of a ladder; and he went down to him with a staff, and snatched the spear from the Egyptian's hand, and slew him with his own spear.
These things did Banaeas the son of Jodae, and he had a name among the three mighty men.
He was honourable among the second three, but he reached not to the first three: and David made him his reporter. And these are the names of King David's mighty men.
Asael Joab's brother; he was among the thirty. Eleanan son of Dudi his uncle in Bethleem.
Saema the Rudaean.
Selles the Kelothite: Iras the son of Isca the Thecoite.
Abiezer the Anothite, of the sons of the Anothite.
Ellon the Aoite; Noere the Netophatite.
Esthai the son of Riba of Gabaeth, son of Benjamin the Ephrathite; Asmoth the Bardiamite; Emasu the Salabonite:
Adroi of the brooks.
Gadabiel son of the Arabothaeite.
the sons of Asan, Jonathan;
Samnan the Arodite; Amnan the son of Arai the Saraurite.
Aliphaleth the son of Asbites, the son of the Machachachite; Eliab the son of Achitophel the Gelonite.
Asarai the Carmelite the son of Uraeoerchi.
Gaal the son of Nathana. The son of much valour, the son of Galaaddi. Elie the Ammanite.
Gelore the Bethorite, armour-bearer to Joab, son of Saruia.
Iras the Ethirite. Gerab the Ethenite.
Urias the Chettite: thirty-seven in all.
But Jonas was very deeply grieved, and he was confounded.
And he prayed to the Lord, and said, O Lord, were not these my words when I was yet in my land? therefore I made haste to flee to Tharsis; because I knew that thou are merciful and compassionate, long-suffering, and abundant in kindness, and repentest of evil.
And now, Lord God, take my life from me; for it is better for me to die than to live.
And the Lord said to Jonas, Art thou very much grieved?
And Jonas went out from the city, and sat over against the city; and he made for himself there a booth, and he sat under it, until he should perceive what would become of the city.
And the Lord God commanded a gourd, and it came up over the head of Jonas, to be a shadow over his head, to shade him from his calamities: and Jonas rejoiced with great joy for the gourd.
And God commanded a worm the next morning, and it smote the gourd, and it withered away.
And it came to pass at the rising of the sun, that God commanded a burning east wind; and the sun smote on the head of Jonas, and he fainted, and despaired of his life, and said, It is better for me to die than to live.
And God said to Jonas, Art thou very much grieved for the gourd? And he said, I am very much grieved, even to death.
And the Lord said, Thou hadst pity on the gourd, for which thou has not suffered, neither didst thou rear it; which came up before night, and perished before another night:
and shall not I spare Nineve, the great city, in which dwell more than twelve myriads of human beings, who do not know their right hand or their left hand; and also much cattle?
Draw near, ye nations; and hearken, ye princes; let the earth hear, and they that are in it; the world, and the people that are therein.
For the wrath of the Lord is upon all nations, and his anger upon the number of them, to destroy them, and give them up to slaughter.
And their slain shall be cast forth, and their corpses; and their ill savour shall come up, and the mountains shall be made wet with their blood.
And all the powers of the heavens shall melt, and the sky shall be rolled up like a scroll: and all the stars shall fall like leaves from a vine, and as leaves fall from a fig-tree.
My sword has been made drunk in heaven: behold, it shall come down upon Idumea, and with judgment upon the people doomed to destruction.
The sword of the Lord is filled with blood, it is glutted with fat, with the blood of goats and lambs, and with the fat of goats and rams: for the Lord has a sacrifice in Bosor, and a great slaughter in Idumea.
And the mighty ones shall fall with them, and the rams and the bulls; and the land shall be soaked with blood, and shall be filled with their fat.
For it is the day of judgment of the Lord, and the year of the recompence of Sion in judgment.
And her valleys shall be turned into pitch, and her land into sulphur; and her land shall be as pitch burning night and day;
and it shall never be quenched, and her smoke shall go up: it shall be made desolate throughout her generations,
and for a long time birds and hedgehogs, and ibises and ravens shall dwell in it: and the measuring line of desolation shall be cast over it, and satyrs shall dwell in it.
Her princes shall be no more; for her kings and her great men shall be destroyed.
And thorns shall spring up in their cities, and in her strong holds: and they shall be habitations of monsters, and a court of ostriches.
And devils shall meet with satyrs, and they shall cry one to the other: there shall satyrs rest, having found for themselves a place of rest.
There has the hedgehog made its nest, and the earth has safely preserved its young: there have the deer met, and seen one another's faces.
They passed by in full number, and not one of them perished: they sought not one another; for the Lord commanded them, and his Spirit gathered them.
And he shall cast lots for them, and his hand has portioned out their pasture, saying, Ye shall inherit the land for ever: they shall rest on it through all generations.
Hear my prayer, O Lord, and let my cry come to thee.
Turn not away thy face from me: in the day when I am afflicted, incline thine ear to me: in the day when I shall call upon thee, speedily hear me.
For my days have vanished like smoke, and my bones have been parched like a stick.
I am blighted like grass, and my heart is dried up; for I have forgotten to eat my bread.
By reason of the voice of my groaning, my bone has cleaved to my flesh.
I have become like a pelican of the wilderness;
I have become like an owl in a ruined house. I have watched, and am become as a sparrow dwelling alone on a roof.
All the day long mine enemies have reproached me; and they that praised me have sworn against me.
For I have eaten ashes as it were bread, and mingled my drink with weeping;
because of thine anger and thy wrath: for thou hast lifted me up, and dashed me down.
My days have declined like a shadow; and I am withered like grass.
But thou, Lord, endurest for ever, and thy memorial to generation and generation.
Thou shalt arise, and have mercy upon Sion: for it is time to have mercy upon her, for the set time is come.
For thy servants have taken pleasure in her stones, and they shall pity her dust.
So the nations shall fear thy name, O Lord, and all kings thy glory.
For the Lord shall build up Sion, and shall appear in his glory.
He has had regard to the prayer of the lowly, and has not despised their petition.
Let this be written for another generation; and the people that shall be created shall praise the Lord.
For he has looked out from the height of his sanctuary; the Lord looked upon the earth from heaven;
to hear the groaning of the fettered ones, to loosen the sons of the slain;
to proclaim the name of the Lord in Sion, and his praise in Jerusalem;
when the people are gathered together, and the kings, to serve the Lord.
He answered him in the way of his strength: tell me the fewness of my days.
Take me not away in the midst of my days: thy years are through all generations.
In the beginning thou, O Lord, didst lay the foundation of the earth; and the heavens are the works of thine hands.
They shall perish, but thou remainest: and they all shall wax old as a garment; and as a vesture shalt thou fold them, and they shall be changed.
But thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail.
The children of thy servants shall dwell securely, and their seed shall prosper for ever.
My heart has uttered a good matter: I declare my works to the king: my tongue is the pen of a quick writer.
Thou art more beautiful than the sons of men: grace has been shed forth on thy lips: therefore God has blessed thee for ever.
Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, O Mighty One, in thy comeliness, and in thy beauty;
and bend thy bow, and prosper, and reign, because of truth and meekness and righteousness; and thy right hand shall guide thee wonderfully.
Thy weapons are sharpened, Mighty One, (the nations shall fall under thee) they are in the heart of the king's enemies.
Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever: the sceptre of thy kingdom is a sceptre of righteousness.
Thou hast loved righteousness, and hated iniquity: therefore God, thy God, has anointed thee with the oil of gladness beyond thy fellows.
Myrrh, and stacte, and cassia are exhaled from thy garments, and out of the ivory palaces,
with which kings' daughters have gladdened thee for thine honour: the queen stood by on thy right hand, clothed in vesture wrought with gold, and arrayed in divers colours.
Hear, O daughter, and see, and incline thine ear; forget also thy people, and thy father's house.
Because the king has desired thy beauty; for he is thy Lord.
And the daughter of Tyre shall adore him with gifts; the rich of the people of the land shall supplicate thy favour.
All her glory is that of the daughter of the king of Esebon, robed as she is in golden fringed garments,
in embroidered clothing: virgins shall be brought to the king after her: her fellows shall be brought to thee.
They shall be brought with gladness and exultation: they shall be led into the king's temple.
Instead of thy fathers children are born to thee: thou shalt make them princes over all the earth.
They shall make mention of thy name from generation to generation: therefore shall the nations give thanks to thee for ever, even for ever and ever.
and he took the mantle of Eliu, which fell from off him, and smote the water, and said, Where is the Lord God of Eliu? and he smote the waters, and they were divided hither and thither; and Elisaie went over.
And the sons of the prophets who were in Jericho on the opposite side saw him, and said, The spirit of Eliu has rested upon Elisaie. And they came to meet him, and did obeisance to him to the ground.
For the sons of Aser according to their kindreds, according to their divisions, according to the houses of their families, according to the number of their names, according to their polls, every male from twenty years old and upward, every one that goes forth with the host,
the numbering of them of the tribe of Aser, was forty and one thousand and five hundred.
For the sons of Nephthali according to their kindreds, according to their divisions, according to the houses of their families, according to the number of their names, according to their polls, every male from twenty years old and upward, every one who goes forth with the host,
the numbering of them of the tribe of Nephthali, was fifty-three thousand and four hundred.
This is the numbering which Moses and Aaron and the rulers of Israel, being twelve men, conducted: there was a man for each tribe, they were according to the tribe of the houses of their family.
And the whole numbering of the children of Israel with their host from twenty years old and upward, every one that goes out to set himself in battle array in Israel, came to
six hundred thousand and three thousand and five hundred and fifty.
But the Levites of the tribe of their family were not counted among the children of Israel.
And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying,
See, thou shalt not muster the tribe of Levi, and thou shalt not take their numbers, in the midst of the children of Israel.
And do thou set the Levites over the tabernacle of witness, and over all its furniture, and over all things that are in it; and they shall do service in it, and they shall encamp round about the tabernacle.
And in removing the tabernacle, the Levites shall take it down, and in pitching the tabernacle they shall set it up: and let the stranger that advances to touch it die.
And the children of Israel shall encamp, every man in his own order, and every man according to his company, with their host.
But let the Levites encamp round about the tabernacle of witness fronting it, and so there shall be no sin among the children of Israel; and the Levites themselves shall keep the guard of the tabernacle of witness.
And the children of Israel did according to all that the Lord commanded Moses and Aaron, so did they.
Therefore the Lord hath made good his word, which he pronounced against us, and against our judges that judged Israel, and against our kings, and against our princes, and against the men of Israel and Juda,
To bring upon us great plagues, such as never happened under the whole heaven, as it came to pass in Jerusalem, according to the things that were written in the law of Moses;
That a man should eat the flesh of his own son, and the flesh of his own daughter.
Moreover he hath delivered them to be in subjection to all the kingdoms that are round about us, to be as a reproach and desolation among all the people round about, where the Lord hath scattered them.
Thus we were cast down, and not exalted, because we have sinned against the Lord our God, and have not been obedient unto his voice.
To the Lord our God appertaineth righteousness: but unto us and to our fathers open shame, as appeareth this day.
For all these plagues are come upon us, which the Lord hath pronounced against us
Yet have we not prayed before the Lord, that we might turn every one from the imaginations of his wicked heart.
Wherefore the Lord watched over us for evil, and the Lord hath brought it upon us: for the Lord is righteous in all his works which he hath commanded us.
Yet we have not hearkened unto his voice, to walk in the commandments of the Lord, that he hath set before us.
And now, O Lord God of Israel, that hast brought thy people out of the land of Egypt with a mighty hand, and high arm, and with signs, and with wonders, and with great power, and hast gotten thyself a name, as appeareth this day:
O Lord our God, we have sinned, we have done ungodly, we have dealt unrighteously in all thine ordinances.
Let thy wrath turn from us: for we are but a few left among the heathen, where thou hast scattered us.
Hear our prayers, O Lord, and our petitions, and deliver us for thine own sake, and give us favour in the sight of them which have led us away:
That all the earth may know that thou art the Lord our God, because Israel and his posterity is called by thy name.
O Lord, look down from thine holy house, and consider us: bow down thine ear, O Lord, to hear us.
Open thine eyes, and behold; for the dead that are in the graves, whose souls are taken from their bodies, will give unto the Lord neither praise nor righteousness:
But the soul that is greatly vexed, which goeth stooping and feeble, and the eyes that fail, and the hungry soul, will give thee praise and righteousness, O Lord.
Therefore we do not make our humble supplication before thee, O Lord our God, for the righteousness of our fathers, and of our kings.
For thou hast sent out thy wrath and indignation upon us, as thou hast spoken by thy servants the prophets, saying,
Thus saith the Lord, Bow down your shoulders to serve the king of Babylon: so shall ye remain in the land that I gave unto your fathers.
But if ye will not hear the voice of the Lord, to serve the king of Babylon,
I will cause to cease out of the cites of Judah, and from without Jerusalem, the voice of mirth, and the voice of joy, the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride: and the whole land shall be desolate of inhabitants.
But we would not hearken unto thy voice, to serve the king of Babylon: therefore hast thou made good the words that thou spakest by thy servants the prophets, namely, that the bones of our kings, and the bones of our fathers, should be taken out of their place.
And, lo, they are cast out to the heat of the day, and to the frost of the night, and they died in great miseries by famine, by sword, and by pestilence.
And the house which is called by thy name hast thou laid waste, as it is to be seen this day, for the wickedness of the house of Israel and the house of Juda.
O Lord our God, thou hast dealt with us after all thy goodness, and according to all that great mercy of thine,
As thou spakest by thy servant Moses in the day when thou didst command him to write the law before the children of Israel, saying,
If ye will not hear my voice, surely this very great multitude shall be turned into a small number among the nations, where I will scatter them.
For I knew that they would not hear me, because it is a stiffnecked people: but in the land of their captivities they shall remember themselves.
And shall know that I am the Lord their God: for I will give them an heart, and ears to hear:
And they shall praise me in the land of their captivity, and think upon my name,
And return from their stiff neck, and from their wicked deeds: for they shall remember the way of their fathers, which sinned before the Lord.
And I will bring them again into the land which I promised with an oath unto their fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and they shall be lords of it: and I will increase them, and they shall not be diminished.
And I will make an everlasting covenant with them to be their God, and they shall be my people: and I will no more drive my people of Israel out of the land that I have given them.
And Israel said to Joseph, Do not thy brethren feed their flock in Sychem? Come, I will send thee to them; and he said to him, Behold, I .
And Israel said to him, Go and see if thy brethren and the sheep are well, and bring me word; and he sent him out of the valley of Chebron, and he came to Sychem.
And a man found him wandering in the field; and the man asked him, saying, What seekest thou?
And he said, I am seeking my brethren; tell me where they feed .
And the Madianites sold Joseph into Egypt; to Petephres, the eunuch of Pharao, captain of the guard.
Who is this that is come from Edom, with red garments from Bosor? thus fair in his apparel, with mighty strength? I speak of righteousness and saving judgment.
Wherefore are thy garments red, and thy raiment as if fresh from a trodden winepress?
I am full of trodden grape, and of the nations there is not a man with me; and I trampled them in my fury, and dashed them to pieces as earth, and brought down their blood to the earth.
For the day of recompence has come upon them, and the year of redemption is at hand.
And I looked, and there was no helper; and I observed, and none upheld: therefore my arm delivered them, and mine anger drew nigh.
And I trampled them in mine anger, and brought down their blood to the earth.
I remembered the mercy of the Lord, the praises of the Lord in all things wherein he recompenses us. The Lord is a good judge to the house of Israel; he deals with us according to his mercy, and according to the abundance of his righteousness.
And he said, Is it not my people? the children surely will not be rebellious: and he became to them deliverance
out of all their affliction: not an ambassador, nor a messenger, but himself saved them, because he loved them and spared them: he himself redeemed them, and took them up, and lifted them up all the days of old.
But they disobeyed, and provoked his Holy Spirit: so he turned to be an enemy, he himself contended against them.
Then he remembered the ancient days, saying, Where is he that brought up from the sea the shepherd of the sheep? where is he that put his Holy Spirit in them?
who led Moses with his right hand, the arm of his glory? he forced the water to separate from before him, to make himself an everlasting name.
He led them through the deep, as a horse through the wilderness, and they fainted not,
and as cattle through a plain: the Spirit came down from the Lord, and guided them: thus thou leddest thy people, to make thyself a glorious name.
Turn from heaven, and look from thy holy habitation and from thy glory: where is thy zeal and thy strength? where is the abundance of thy mercy and of thy compassions, that thou hast withholden thyself from us?
For thou art our Father; for though Abraham knew us not, and Israel did not acknowledge us, yet do thou, O Lord, our Father, deliver us: thy name has been upon us from the beginning.
Why hast thou caused us to err, O Lord, from thy way? and has hardened our hearts, that we should not fear thee? Return for thy servants' sake, for the sake of the tribes of thine inheritance,
that we may inherit a small part of thy holy mountain.
We are become as at the beginning, when thou didst not rule over us, and thy name was not called upon us.
And the Lord said to Samuel, How long dost thou mourn for Saul, whereas I have rejected him from reigning over Israel? Fill thy horn with oil, and come, I will send thee to Jessae, to Bethleem; for I have seen among his sons a king for me.
And Samuel said, How can I go? whereas Saul will hear of it, and slay me: and the Lord said, Take a heifer in thine hand and thou shall say, I am come to sacrifice to the Lord.
And thou shalt call Jessae to the sacrifice, and I will make known to thee what thou shalt do; and thou shalt anoint him whom I shall mention to thee.
And Samuel did all that the Lord told him; and he came to Bethleem: and the elders of the city were amazed at meeting him, and said, Dost thou come peaceably, thou Seer?
And he said, Peaceably: I am come to sacrifice to the Lord. Sanctify yourselves, and rejoice with me this day: and he sanctified Jessae and his sons, and he called them to the sacrifice.
And it came to pass when they came in, that he saw Eliab, and said, Surely the Lord's anointed is before him.
But the Lord said to Samuel, Look not on his appearance, nor on his stature, for I have rejected him; for God sees not as man looks; for man looks at the outward appearance, but God looks at the heart.
And Jessae called Aminadab, and he passed before Samuel: and he said, Neither has God chosen this one.
And Jessae caused Sama to pass by: and he said, Neither has God chosen this one.
And Jessae caused his seven sons to pass before Samuel: and Samuel said, the Lord has not chosen these.
And Samuel said to Jessae, Hast thou no more sons? And Jessae said, There is yet a little one; behold, he tends the flock. And Samuel said to Jessae, Send and fetch him for we may not sit down till he comes.
And he sent and fetched him: and he was ruddy, with beauty of eyes, and very goodly to behold. And the Lord said to Samuel, Arise, and anoint David, for he is good.
And Samuel took the horn of oil, and anointed him in the midst of his brethren: and the Spirit of the Lord came upon David from that day forward: and Samuel arose, and departed to Armathaim.
And the Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul, and an evil spirit from the Lord tormented him.
And Saul's servants said to him, Behold now, and evil spirit from the Lord torments thee.
Let now thy servants speak before thee, and let them seek for our lord a man skilled to play on the harp; and it shall come to pass when an evil spirit comes upon thee and he shall play on his harp, that thou shalt be well, and he shall refresh thee.
And Saul said to his servants, Look now out for me a skilful player, and bring him to me.
And one of his servants answered and said, Behold, I have seen a son of Jessae the Bethleemite, and he understands playing on the harp, and the man is prudent, and a warrior, and wise in speech, and the man is handsome, and the Lord is with him.
And Saul sent messengers to Jessae, saying, Send to me thy son David who is with thy flock.
And Jessae took a homer of bread, and a bottle of wine, and one kid of the goats, and sent them by the hand of his son David to Saul.
And David went in to Saul, and stood before him; and he loved him greatly; and he became his armour-bearer.
And Saul sent to Jessae, saying, Let David, I pray thee, stand before me, for he has found grace in my eyes.
And it came to pass when the evil spirit was upon Saul, that David took his harp, and played with his hand: and Saul was refreshed, and it was well with him, and the evil spirit departed from him.
For a mortal born of a woman is short lived, and full of wrath.
Or he falls like a flower that has bloomed; and he departs like a shadow, and cannot continue.
Hast thou not taken account even of him, and caused him to enter into judgment before thee?
For who shall be pure from uncleanness? not even one;
if even his life should be but one day upon the earth: and his months are numbered by him: thou hast appointed him for a time, and he shall by no means exceed it.
Depart from him, that he may be quiet, and take pleasure in his life, though as a hireling.
For there is hope for a tree, even if it should be cut down, that it shall blossom again, and its branch shall not fail.
For though its root should grow old in the earth, and its stem die in the rock;
it will blossom from the scent of water, and will produce a crop, as one newly planted.
But a man that has died is utterly gone; and when a mortal has fallen, he is no more.
For the sea wastes in length of time, and a river fails and is dried up.
And man that has lain down in death shall certainly not rise again till the heaven be dissolved, and they shall not awake from their sleep.
For oh that thou hadst kept me in the grave, and hadst hidden me until thy wrath should cease, and thou shouldest set me a time in which thou wouldest remember me!
For if a man should die, shall he live again, having accomplished the days of his life? I will wait till I exist again?
Then shalt thou call, and I will hearken to thee: but do not thou reject the work of thine hands.
But thou hast numbered my devices: and not one of my sins shall escape thee?
An thou hast sealed up my transgressions in a bag, and marked if I have been guilty of any transgression unawares.
Thou drivest him to an end, and he is gone: thou settest thy face against him, and sendest him away;
and though his children be multiplied, he knows it not; and if they be few, he is not aware.
But his flesh is in pain, and his soul mourns.
The fool has said in his heart, There is no God. They have corrupted themselves, and become abominable in their devices; there is none that does goodness, there is not even so much as one.
The Lord looked down from heaven upon the sons of men, to see if there were any that understood, or sought after god.
They are all gone out of the way, they are together become good for nothing, there is none that does good, no not one. Their throat is an open sepulchre; with their tongues they have used deceit; the poison of asps is under their lips: whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness; their feet are swift to shed blood: destruction and misery are in their ways; and the way of peace they have not known: there is no fear of God before their eyes.
Will not all the workers of iniquity know, who eat up my people as they would eat bread? they have not called upon the Lord.
There were they alarmed with fear, where there was no fear; for God is in the righteous generation.
Ye have shamed the counsel of the poor, because the Lord is his hope.
Who will bring the salvation of Israel out of Sion? when the Lord brings back the captivity of his people, let Jacob exult, and Israel be glad.
And the Lord spoke to Moses after the two sons of Aaron died in bringing strange fire before the Lord, so they died.
And the Lord said to Moses, Speak to Aaron thy brother, and let him not come in at all times into the holy place within the veil before the propitiatory, which is upon the ark of the testimony, and he shall not die; for I will appear in a cloud on the propitiatory.
Thus shall Aaron enter into the holy place; with a calf of the herd for a sin-offering, and having a ram for a whole-burnt-offering.
And he shall put on the consecrated linen tunic, and he shall have on his flesh the linen drawers, and shall gird himself with a linen girdle, and shall put on the linen cap, they are holy garments; and he shall bathe all his body in water, and shall put them on.
And he shall take of the congregation of the children of Israel two kids of the goats for a sin-offering, and one lamb for a whole-burnt-offering.
And Aaron shall bring the calf for his own sin-offering, and shall make atonement for himself and for his house.
And he shall take the two goats, and place them before the Lord by the door of the tabernacle of witness.
and Aaron shall cast lots upon the two goats, one lot for the Lord, and the other for the scape-goat.
And Aaron shall bring forward the goat on which the lot for the Lord fell, and shall offer him for a sin-offering.
and the goat upon which the lot of the scape-goat came, he shall present alive before the Lord, to make atonement upon him, so as to send him away as a scape-goat, and he shall send him into the wilderness.
And Aaron shall bring the calf for his sin, and he shall make atonement for himself and for his house, and he shall kill the calf for his sin-offering.
And he shall take his censer full of coals of fire off the altar, which is before the Lord; and he shall fill his hands with fine compound incense, and shall bring it within the veil.
And he shall put the incense on the fire before the Lord, and the smoke of the incense shall cover the mercy-seat over the tables of testimony, and he shall not die.
And he shall take of the blood of the calf, and sprinkle with his finger on the mercy-seat eastward: before the mercy-seat shall he sprinkle seven times of the blood with his finger.
And he shall kill the goat for the sin-offering that is for the people, before the Lord; and he shall bring in of its blood within the veil, and shall do with its blood as he did with the blood of the calf, and shall sprinkle its blood on the mercy-seat, in front of the mercy-seat.
and he shall make atonement for the sanctuary on account of the uncleanness of the children of Israel, and for their trespasses in the matter of all their sins; and thus shall he do to the tabernacle of witness established among them in the midst of their uncleanness.
and there shall be no man in the tabernacle of witness, when he goes in to make atonement in the holy place, until he shall have come out; and he shall make atonement for himself, and for his house, and for all the congregation of the children of Israel.
And he shall come forth to the altar that is before the Lord, and he shall make atonement upon it; and he shall take of the blood of the calf, and of the blood of the goat, and shall put it on the horns of the altar round about.
And he shall sprinkle some of the blood upon it seven times with his finger, and shall purge it, and hallow it from the uncleanness of the children of Israel.
And he shall finish making atonement for the sanctuary and for the tabernacle of witness, and for the altar; and he shall make a cleansing for the priests, and he shall bring the living goat;
and Aaron shall lay his hands on the head of the live goat, and he shall declare over him all the iniquities of the children of Israel, and all their unrighteousness, and all their sins; and he shall lay them upon the head of the live goat, and shall send him by the hand of a ready man into the wilderness.
And the goat shall bear their unrighteousnesses upon him into a desert land; and Aaron shall send away the goat into the wilderness.
And Aaron shall enter into the tabernacle of witness, and shall put off the linen garment, which he had put on, as he entered into the holy place, and shall lay it by there.
And he shall bathe his body in water in the holy place, and shall put on his raiment, and shall go out and offer the whole-burnt-offering for himself and the whole-burnt-offering for the people: and shall make atonement for himself and for his house, and for the people, as for the priests.
And he shall offer the fat for the sin-offering on the altar.
And he that sends forth the goat that has been set apart to be let go, shall wash his garments, and bathe his body in water, and afterwards shall enter into the camp.
And the calf for the sin-offering, and the goat for the sin-offering, whose blood was brought in to make atonement in the holy place, they shall carry forth out of the camp, and burn them with fire, even their skins and their flesh and their dung.
And he that burns them shall wash his garments, and bathe his body in water, and afterwards he shall enter into the camp.
And this shall be a perpetual statute for you; in the seventh month, on the tenth day of the month, ye shall humble your souls, and shall do no work, the native and the stranger who abides among you.
For in this day he shall make an atonement for you, to cleanse you from all your sins before the Lord, and ye shall be purged.
This shall be to you a most holy sabbath, a rest, and ye shall humble your souls; it is a perpetual ordinance.
The priest whomsoever they shall anoint shall make atonement, and whomsoever they shall consecrate to exercise the priestly office after his father; and he shall put on the linen robe, the holy garment.
And he shall make atonement for the most holy place, and the tabernacle of witness; and he shall make atonement for the altar, and for the priests; and he shall make atonement for all the congregation.
And this shall be to you a perpetual statute to make atonement for the children of Israel for all their sins: it shall be done once in the year, as the Lord commanded Moses.
Blessed is the man that hath not slipped with his mouth, and is not pricked with the multitude of sins.
Blessed is he whose conscience hath not condemned him, and who is not fallen from his hope in the Lord.
Riches are not comely for a niggard: and what should an envious man do with money?
He that gathereth by defrauding his own soul gathereth for others, that shall spend his goods riotously.
He that is evil to himself, to whom will he be good? he shall not take pleasure in his goods.
There is none worse than he that envieth himself; and this is a recompence of his wickedness.
And if he doeth good, he doeth it unwillingly; and at the last he will declare his wickedness.
The envious man hath a wicked eye; he turneth away his face, and despiseth men.
A covetous man's eye is not satisfied with his portion; and the iniquity of the wicked drieth up his soul.
A wicked eye envieth his bread, and he is a niggard at his table.
My son, according to thy ability do good to thyself, and give the Lord his due offering.
Remember that death will not be long in coming, and that the covenant of the grave is not shewed unto thee.
Do good unto thy friend before thou die, and according to thy ability stretch out thy hand and give to him.
Defraud not thyself of the good day, and let not the part of a good desire overpass thee.
Shalt thou not leave thy travails unto another? and thy labours to be divided by lot?
Give, and take, and sanctify thy soul; for there is no seeking of dainties in the grave.
All flesh waxeth old as a garment: for the covenant from the beginning is, Thou shalt die the death.
As of the green leaves on a thick tree, some fall, and some grow; so is the generation of flesh and blood, one cometh to an end, and another is born.
Every work rotteth and consumeth away, and the worker thereof shall go withal.
Blessed is the man that doth meditate good things in wisdom, and that reasoneth of holy things by his understanding.
He that considereth her ways in his heart shall also have understanding in her secrets.
Go after her as one that traceth, and lie in wait in her ways.
He that prieth in at her windows shall also hearken at her doors.
He that doth lodge near her house shall also fasten a pin in her walls.
He shall pitch his tent nigh unto her, and shall lodge in a lodging where good things are.
He shall set his children under her shelter, and shall lodge under her branches.
By her he shall be covered from heat, and in her glory shall he dwell.
Hear the word of the Lord, O house of Jacob, and every family of the house of Israel.
Thus saith the Lord, What trespass have your fathers found in me, that they have revolted far from me, and gone after vanities, and become vain?
The priests said not, Where is the Lord? and they that held by the law knew me not: the shepherds also sinned against me, and the prophets prophesied by Baal, and went after that which profited not.
Therefore I will yet plead with you, and will plead with your children's children.
The heaven is amazed at this, and is very exceedingly horror-struck, saith the Lord.
For my people has committed two faults, and evil ones: they have forsaken me, the fountain of water of life, and hewn out for themselves broken cisterns, which will not be able to hold water.
And now what hast thou to do with the way of Egypt, to drink the water of Geon? and what hast thou to do with the way of the Assyrians, to drink the water of rivers?
Thine apostasy shall correct thee, and thy wickedness shall reprove thee: know then, and see, that thy forsaking me has been bitter to thee, saith the Lord thy God; and I have taken no pleasure in thee, saith the Lord thy God.
For of old thou hast broken thy yoke, and plucked asunder thy bands; and thou has said, I will not serve thee, but will go upon every high hill, and under every shady tree, there will I indulge in my fornication.
Yet I planted thee a fruitful vine, entirely of the right sort: how art thou a strange vine turned to bitterness!
Though thou shouldest wash thyself with nitre, and multiply to thyself soap, still thou art stained by thine iniquities before me, saith the Lord.
How wilt thou say, I am not polluted, and have not gone after Baal? behold thy ways in the burial-ground, and know what thou hast done: her voice has howled in the evening:
she has extended her ways over the waters of the desert; she was hurried along by the lusts of her soul; she is given up to them, who will turn her back? none that seek her shall be weary; at the time of her humiliation they shall find her.
Hear ye the word of the Lord: thus saith the Lord, Have I been a wilderness or a dry land to Israel? wherefore has my people said, We will not be ruled over, and will not come to thee any more?
Will a bride forget her ornaments, or a virgin her girdle? but my people has forgotten me days without number.
What fair device wilt thou yet employ in thy ways, so as to seek love? it shall not be so; moreover thou has done wickedly in corrupting thy ways;
and in thine hands has been found the blood of innocent souls; I have not found them in holes, but on every oak.
Yet thou saidst, I am innocent: only let his wrath be turned away from me. Behold, I will plead with thee, whereas thou sayest, I have not sinned.
O Lord, I have heard thy report, and was afraid: I considered thy works, and was amazed: thou shalt be known between the two living creatures, thou shalt be acknowledged when the years draw nigh; thou shalt be manifested when the time is come; when my soul is troubled, thou wilt in wrath remember mercy.
God shall come from Thaeman, and the Holy One from the dark shady mount Pharan. Pause.
His excellence covered the heavens, and the earth was full of his praise. And his brightness shall be as light; there were horns in his hands, and he caused a mighty love of his strength.
Before his face shall go a report, and it shall go forth into the plains,
the earth stood at his feet and trembled: he beheld, and the nations melted away: the mountains were violently burst through, the everlasting hills melted at his everlasting going forth.
Because of troubles I looked upon the tents of the Ethiopians: the tabernacles also of the land of Madiam shall be dismayed.
Surely thou didst bend they bow at scepters, saith the Lord. Pause. The land of rivers shall be torn asunder.
The nations shall see thee and be in pain, as thou dost divide the moving waters: the deep uttered her voice, and raised her form on high.
The sun was exalted, and the moon stood still in her course: thy darts shall go forth at the light, at the brightness of the gleaming of thine arms.
Thou wilt bring low the land with threatening, and in wrath thou wilt break down the nations.
Thou wentest forth for the salvation of thy people, to save thine anointed: thou shalt bring death on the heads of transgressors; thou has brought bands upon their neck. Pause.
Save me, O God; for the waters have come in to my soul.
I am stuck fast in deep mire, and there is no standing: I am come in to the depths of the sea, and a storm has overwhelmed me.
I am weary of crying, my throat has become hoarse; mine eyes have failed by my waiting on my God.
They that hate me without a cause are more than the hairs of my head: my enemies that persecute me unrighteously are strengthened: then I restored that which I took not away.
O God, thou knowest my foolishness; and my transgressions are not hidden from thee.
Let not them that wait on thee, O Lord of hosts, be ashamed on my account: let not them that seek thee, be ashamed on my account, O God of Israel.
For I have suffered reproach for thy sake; shame has covered my face.
I became strange to my brethren, and a stranger to my mother's children.
For the zeal of thine house has eaten me up; and the reproaches of them that reproached thee are fallen upon me.
And I bowed down my soul with fasting, and that was made my reproach.
And I put on sackcloth for my covering; and I became a proverb to them.
They that sit in the gate talked against me, and they that drank wine sang against me.
But I will cry to thee, O Lord, in my prayer; O God, it is a propitious time: in the multitude of thy mercy hear me, in the truth of thy salvation.
Save me from the mire, that I stick not in it: let me be delivered from them that hate me, and from the deep waters.
Let not the waterflood drown me, nor let the deep swallow me up; neither let the well shut its mouth upon me.
Hear me, O Lord; for thy mercy is good: according to the multitude of thy compassions look upon me.
And turn not away thy face from thy servant; for I am afflicted: hear me speedily.
Draw nigh to my soul and redeem it: deliver me because of mine enemies.
For thou knowest my reproach, and my shame, and my confusion; all that afflict me are before thee.
My soul has waited for reproach and misery; and I waited for one to grieve with me, but there was none; and for one to comfort me, but I found none.
They gave me also gall for my food, and made me drink vinegar for my thirst.
Let their table before them be for a snare, and for a recompense, and for a stumbling-block.
Let their eyes be darkened that they should not see; and bow down their back continually.
Pour out thy wrath upon them, and let the fury of thine anger take hold on them.
Let their habitation be made desolate; and let there be no inhabitant in their tents:
Because they persecuted him whom thou hast smitten; and they have added to the grief of my wounds.
Add iniquity to their iniquity; and let them not come into thy righteousness.
Let them be blotted out of the book of the living, and let them not be written with the righteous.
I am poor and sorrowful; but the salvation of thy countenance has helped me.
I will praise the name of my God with a song, I will magnify him with praise;
and this shall please God more than a young calf having horns and hoofs.
Let the poor see and rejoice; seek the Lord diligently, and ye shall live.
For the Lord hears the poor, and does not set at nought his fettered ones.
Let the heavens and the earth raise him, the sea, and all things moving in them.
For God will save Sion, and the cities of Judea shall be built; and men shall dwell there, and inherit it.
And the seed of his servants shall possess it, and they that love his name shall dwell therein.
Remember, O Lord, what has happened to us: behold, and look on our reproach.
Our inheritance has been turned away to aliens, our houses to strangers:
we are become orphans, we have no father, our mothers are as widows.
We have drunk our water for money; our wood is sold to us for a burden on our neck:
we have been persecuted, we have laboured, we have had no rest.
Egypt gave the hand to us, Assur to their own satisfaction.
Our fathers sinned, and are not: we have borne their iniquities.
Servants have ruled over us: there is none to ransom us out of their hand.
We shall bring in our bread with danger of our lives, because of the sword of the wilderness.
Our skin is blackened like an oven; they are convulsed, because of the storms of famine.
They humbled the women in Sion, the virgins in the cities of Juda.
Princes were hanged up by their hands: the elders were not honoured.
The chosen men lifted up the voice in weeping, and the youths fainted under the wood.
And the elders ceased from the gate, the chosen men ceased from their music.
The joy of our heart has ceased; our dance is turned into mourning.
The crown has fallen from our head: yea, woe to us! for we have sinned.
For this has grief come; our heart is sorrowful: for this our eyes are darkened.
Over the mountain of Sion, because it is made desolate, foxes have walked therein.
But thou, O Lord, shalt dwell for ever; thy throne shall endure to generation and generation.
Wherefore wilt thou utterly forget us, and abandon us a long time?
Turn us, O Lord, to thee, and we shall be turned; and renew our days as before.
For thou hast indeed rejected us; thou hast been very wroth against us.
O Lord God of my salvation, I have cried by day and in the night before thee.
Let my prayer come in before thee; incline thine ear to my supplication, O Lord.
For my soul is filled with troubles, and my life has drawn nigh to Hades.
I have been reckoned with them that go down to the pit; I became as a man without help;
free among the dead, as the slain ones cast out, who sleep in the tomb; whom thou rememberest no more; and they are rejected from thy hand.
They laid me in the lowest pit, in dark places, and in the shadow of death.
Thy wrath has pressed heavily upon me, and thou hast brought upon me all thy billows. Pause.
Thou hast removed my acquaintance far from me; they have made me an abomination to themselves; I have been delivered up, and have not gone forth.
Mine eyes are dimmed from poverty; but I cried to thee, O Lord, all the day; I spread forth my hands to thee.
Wilt thou work wonders for the dead? or shall physicians raise them up, that they shall praise thee?
Shall any one declare thy mercy in the tomb? and thy truth in destruction?
Shall thy wonders be known in darkness? and thy righteousness in a forgotten land?
But I cried to thee, O Lord; and in the morning shall my prayer prevent thee.
Wherefore, O Lord, dost thou reject my prayer, and turn thy face away from me?
I am poor and in troubles from my youth; and having been exalted, I was brought low and into despair.
Thy wrath has passed over me; and thy terrors have greatly disquieted me.
They compassed me like water; all the day they beset me together.
Thou hast put far from me every friend, and mine acquaintances because of my wretchedness.
Attend, O heaven, and I will speak; and let the earth hear the words out of my mouth.
Let my speech be looked for as the rain, and my words come down as dew, as the shower upon the herbage, and as snow upon the grass.
For I have called on the name of the Lord: assign ye greatness to our God.
As for God, his works are true, and all his ways are judgment: God is faithful, and there is no unrighteousness in him; just and holy is the Lord.
They have sinned, not pleasing him; spotted children, a froward and perverse generation.
Do ye thus recompense the Lord? is the people thus foolish and unwise? did not he himself thy father purchase thee, and make thee, and form thee?
Remember the days of old, consider the years for past ages: ask thy father, and he shall relate to thee, thine elders, and they shall tell thee.
When the Most High divided the nations, when he separated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the nations according to the number of the angels of God.
And his people Jacob became the portion of the Lord, Israel was the line of his inheritance.
He maintained him in the wilderness, in burning thirst and a dry land: he led him about and instructed him, and kept him as the apple of an eye.
As an eagle would watch over his brood, and yearns over his young, receives them having spread his wings, and takes them up on his back:
the Lord alone led them, there was no strange god with them.
He brought them up on the strength of the land; he fed them with the fruits of the fields; they sucked honey out of the rock, and oil out of the solid rock.
Butter of cows, and milk of sheep, with the fat of lambs and rams, of calves and kids, with fat of kidneys of wheat; and he drank wine, the blood of the grape.
So Jacob ate and was filled, and the beloved one kicked; he grew fat, he became thick and broad: then he forsook the God that made him, and departed from God his Saviour.
They provoked me to anger with strange gods; with their abominations they bitterly angered me.
They sacrificed to devils, and not to God; to gods whom they knew not: new and fresh gods came in, whom their fathers knew not.
Thou hast forsaken God that begot thee, and forgotten God who feeds thee.
And the Lord saw, and was jealous; and was provoked by the anger of his sons and daughters,
and said, I will turn away my face from them, and will show what shall happen to them in the last days; for it is a perverse generation, sons in whom is no faith.
They have provoked me to jealousy with that which is not God, they have exasperated me with their idols; and I will provoke them to jealousy with them that are no nation, I will anger them with a nation void of understanding.
For a fire has been kindled out of my wrath, it shall burn to hell below; it shall devour the land, and the fruits of it; it shall set on fire the foundations of the mountains.
I will gather evils upon them, and will fight with my weapons against them.
They shall be consumed with hunger and the devouring of birds, and there shall be irremediable destruction: I will send forth against them the teeth of wild beasts, with the rage of serpents creeping on the ground.
Without, the sword shall bereave them of children, and terror shall issue out of the secret chambers; the young man shall perish with the virgin, the suckling with him who has grown old.
I said, I will scatter them, and I will cause their memorial to cease from among men.
Were it not for the wrath of the enemy, lest they should live long, lest their enemies should combine against them; lest they should say, Our own high arm, and not the Lord, has done all these things.
It is a nation that has lost counsel, neither is there understanding in them.
They had not sense to understand: let them reserve these things against the time to come.
How should one pursue a thousand, and two rout tens of thousands, if God had not sold them, and the Lord delivered them up?
For their gods are not as our God, but our enemies are void of understanding.
For their vine is of the vine of Sodom, and their vine-branch of Gomorrha: their grape is a grape of gall, their cluster is one of bitterness.
Their wine is the rage of serpents, and the incurable rage of asps.
Lo! are not these things stored up by me, and sealed among my treasures?
In the day of vengeance I will recompense, whensoever their foot shall be tripped up; for the day of their destruction is near to them, and the judgments at hand are close upon you.
For the Lord shall judge his people, and shall be comforted over his servants; for he saw that they were utterly weakened, and failed in the hostile invasion, and were become feeble:
and the Lord said, Where are their gods on whom they trusted?
the fat of whose sacrifices ye ate, and ye drank the wine of their drink-offerings? let them arise and help you, and be your protectors.
Behold, behold that I am he, and there is no god beside me: I kill, and I will make to live: I will smite, and I will heal; and there is none who shall deliver out of my hands.
For I will lift up my hand to heaven, and swear by my right hand, and I will say, I live for ever.
For I will sharpen my sword like lightning, and my hand shall take hold of judgment; and I will render judgment to my enemies, and will recompense them that hate me.
I will make my weapons drunk with blood, and my sword shall devour flesh, it shall glut itself with the blood of the wounded, and from the captivity of the heads of their enemies that rule over them.
Rejoice, ye heavens, with him, and let all the angels of God worship him; rejoice ye Gentiles, with his people, and let all the sons of God strengthen themselves in him; for he will avenge the blood of his sons, and he will render vengeance, and recompense justice to his enemies, and will reward them that hate him; and the Lord shall purge the land of his people.
And Moses wrote this song in that day, and taught it to the children of Israel; and Moses went in and spoke all the words of this law in the ears of the people, he and Joshua the son of Naue.
And Moses finished speaking to all Israel.
And he said to them, Take heed with your heart to all these words, which I testify to you this day, which ye shall command your sons, to observe and do all the words of this law.
For this is no vain word to you; for it is your life, and because of this word ye shall live long upon the land, into which ye go over Jordan to inherit it.
And the Lord spoke to Moses in this day, saying,
Go up to the mount Abarim, this mountain Nabau which is in the land of Moab over against Jericho, and behold the land of Chanaan, which I give to the sons of Israel:
and die in the mount whither thou goest up, and be added to thy people; as Aaron thy brother died in mount Or, and was added to his people.
Because ye disobeyed my word among the children of Israel, at the waters of strife of Cades in the wilderness of Sin; because ye sanctified me not among the sons of Israel.
Thou shalt see the land before thee, but thou shalt not enter into it.
Woe to you, ye wings of the land of ships, beyond the rivers of Ethiopia.
He sends messengers by the sea, and paper letters on the water: for swift messengers shall go to a lofty nation, and to a strange and harsh people. Who is beyond it? a nation not looked for, and trodden down.
Now all the rivers of the land shall be inhabited as an inhabited country; their land shall be as when a signal is raised from a mountain; it shall be audible as the sound of a trumpet.
For thus said the Lord to me, There shall be security in my city, as the light of noonday heat, and it shall be as a cloud of dew in the day of harvest.
Before the reaping time, when the flower has been completely formed, and the unripe grape has put forth its flower and blossomed, then shall he take away the little clusters with pruning-hooks, and shall take away the small branches, and cut them off;
And he shall leave them together to the birds of the sky, and to the wild beasts of the earth: and the fowls of the sky shall be gathered upon them, and all the beasts of the land shall come upon him.
In that time shall presents be brought to the Lord of hosts from a people afflicted and peeled, and from a people great from henceforth and for ever; a nation hoping and yet trodden down, which is in a part of a river of his land, to the place where is the name of the Lord of hosts, the mount Sion.
My son, forget not my laws; but let thine heart keep my words:
for length of existence, and years of life, and peace, shall they add to thee.
Let not mercy and truth forsake thee; but bind them about thy neck:
so shalt thou find favour: and do thou provide things honest in the sight of the Lord, and of men.
Trust in God with all thine heart; and be not exalted in thine own wisdom.
In all thy ways acquaint thyself with her, that she may rightly direct thy paths.
Be not wise in thine own conceit; but fear God, and depart from all evil.
Then shall there be health to thy body, and good keeping to thy bones.
Honour the Lord with thy just labours, and give him the first of thy fruits of righteousness:
that thy storehouses may be completely filled with corn, and that thy presses may burst forth with wine.
My son, despise not the chastening of the Lord; nor faint when thou art rebuked of him:
for whom the Lord loves, he rebukes, and scourges every son whom he receives.
Blessed is the man who has found wisdom, and the mortal who knows prudence.
For it is better to traffic for her, than for treasures of gold and silver.
And she is more valuable than precious stones: no evil thing shall resist her: she is well known to all that approach her, and no precious thing is equal to her in value.
For length of existence and years of life are in her right hand; and in her left hand are wealth and glory: out of her mouth proceeds righteousness, and she carries law and mercy upon her tongue.
Her ways are good ways, and all her paths are peaceful.
She is a tree of life to all that lay hold upon her; and she is a secure help to all that stay themselves on her, as on the Lord.
God by wisdom founded the earth, and by prudence he prepared the heavens.
By understanding were the depths broken up, and the clouds dropped water.
My son, let them not pass from thee, but keep my counsel and understanding:
that thy soul may live, and that there may be grace round thy neck; and it shall be health to thy flesh, and safety to thy bones:
that thou mayest go confidently in peace in all thy ways, and that thy foot may not stumble.
For if thou rest, thou shalt be undismayed; and if thou sleep, thou shalt slumber sweetly.
And thou shalt not be afraid of alarm coming upon thee, neither of approaching attacks of ungodly men.
For the Lord shall be over all thy ways, and shall establish thy foot that thou be not moved.
Forbear not to do good to the poor, whensoever thy hand may have power to help him.
Say not, Come back another time, to-morrow I will give; while thou art able to do him good: for thou knowest not what the next day will bring forth.
Devise not evil against thy friend, living near thee and trusting in thee.
Be not ready to quarrel with a man without a cause, lest he do thee some harm.
Procure not the reproaches of bad men, neither do thou covet their ways.
For every transgressor is unclean before the Lord; neither does he sit among the righteous.
The curse of God is in the houses of the ungodly; but the habitations of the just are blessed.
The Lord resists the proud; but he gives grace to the humble.
In that day the lamentation in Jerusalem shall be very great, as the mourning for the pomegranate grove cut down in the plain.
And the land shall lament in separate families, the family of the house of David by itself, and their wives by themselves; the family of the house of Nathan by itself, and their wives by themselves;
the family of the house of Levi by itself, and their wives by themselves; the family of Symeon by itself, and their wives by themselves;
all the families that are left, each family by itself, and their wives by themselves.
Whether then indeed they shall hear or fear, (for it is a provoking house,) yet they shall know that thou art a prophet in the midst of them.
And thou, son of man, fear them not, nor be dismayed at their face; (for they will madden and will rise up against thee round about, and thou dwellest in the midst of scorpions): be not afraid of their words, nor be dismayed at their countenance, for it is a provoking house.
And thou shalt speak my words to them, whether they will hear or fear: for it is a provoking house.
And thou, son of man, hear him that speaks to thee; be not thou provoking, as the provoking house: open thy mouth, and eat what I give thee.
And I looked, and behold, a hand stretched out to me, and in it a volume of a book.
And he unrolled it before me: and in it the front and the back were written upon: and there was written in it Lamentation, and mournful song, and woe.
And in the third month of the departure of the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt, on the same day, they came into the wilderness of Sina.
And they departed from Raphidin, and came into the wilderness of Sina, and there Israel encamped before the mountain.
And Moses went up to the mount of God, and God called him out of the mountain, saying, These things shalt thou say to the house of Jacob, and thou shalt report them to the children of Israel.
Ye have seen all that I have done to the Egyptians, and I took you up as upon eagles' wings, and I brought you near to myself.
And now if ye will indeed hear my voice, and keep my covenant, ye shall be to me a peculiar people above all nations; for the whole earth is mine.
And ye shall be to me a royal priesthood and a holy nation: these words shalt thou speak to the children of Israel.
And Moses came and called the elders of the people, and he set before them all these words, which God appointed them.
And all the people answered with one accord, and said, All things that God has spoken, we will do and hearken to: and Moses reported these words to God.
And the Lord said to Moses, Lo! I come to thee in a pillar of a cloud, that the people may hear me speaking to thee, and may believe thee for ever: and Moses reported the words of the people to the Lord.
And the Lord said to Moses, Go down and solemnly charge the people, and sanctify them to-day and to-morrow, and let them wash their garments.
And let them be ready against the third day, for on the third day the Lord will descend upon mount Sina before all the people.
And thou shalt separate the people round about, saying, Take heed to yourselves that ye go not up into the mountain, nor touch any part of it: every one that touches the mountain shall surely die.
A hand shall not touch it, for every one that touches shall be stoned with stones or shot through with a dart, whether beast or whether man, it shall not live: when the voices and trumpets and cloud depart from off the mountain, they shall come up on the mountain.
And Moses went down from the mountain to the people, and sanctified them, and they washed their clothes.
And he said to the people, Be ready: for three days come not near to a woman.
And it came to pass on the third day, as the morning drew nigh, there were voices and lightnings and a dark cloud on mount Sina: the voice of the trumpet sounded loud, and all the people in the camp trembled.
And the Lord said to him, Go, descend, and come up thou and Aaron with thee; but let not the priests and the people force their way to come up to God, lest the Lord destroy some of them.
And Moses went down to the people, and spoke to them.
And after Elius had ceased from speaking, the Lord spoke to Job through the whirlwind and clouds, saying,
Who is this that hides counsel from me, and confines words in his heart, and thinks to conceal them from me?
Gird thy loins like a man; and I will ask thee, and do thou answer me.
Where wast thou when I founded the earth? tell me now, if thou hast knowledge,
who set the measures of it, if thou knowest? or who stretched a line upon it?
On what are its rings fastened? and who is he that laid the corner-stone upon it?
When the stars were made, all my angels praised me with a loud voice.
And I shut up the sea with gates, when it rushed out, coming forth out its mother's womb.
And I made a cloud its clothing, and swathed it in mist.
And I set bounds to it, surrounding it with bars and gates.
And I said to it, Hitherto shalt thou come, but thou shalt not go beyond, but thy waves shall be confined within thee.
Or did I order the morning light in thy time; and did the morning star then first see his appointed place;
to lay hold of the extremities of the earth, to cast out the ungodly out of it?
Or didst thou take clay of the ground, and form a living creature, and set it with the power of speech upon the earth?
And hast thou removed light from the ungodly, and crushed the arm of the proud?
Or hast thou gone to the source of the sea, and walked in the tracks of the deep?
And do the gates of death open to thee for fear; and did the porters of hell quake when they saw thee?
And hast thou been instructed in the breadth of the whole earth under heaven? tell me now, what is the extent of it?
And in what kind of a land does the light dwell? and of what kind is the place of darkness?
If thou couldest bring me to their utmost boundaries, and if also thou knowest their paths;
I know then that thou wert born at that time, and the number of thy years is great.
But hast thou gone to the treasures of snow? and hast thou seen the treasures of hail?
And is there a store of them, for thee against the time of thine enemies, for the day of wars and battle?
And whence proceeds the frost? or whence is the south wind dispersed over the whole world under heaven?
And who prepared a course for the violent rain, and a way for the thunders;
Who is the rain's father? and who has generated the drops of dew?
And out of whose womb comes the ice? and who has produced the frost in the sky,
which descends like flowing water? who has terrified the face of the ungodly?
And dost thou understand the band of Pleias, and hast thou opened the barrier of Orion?
And knowest thou the changes of heaven, or the events which take place together under heaven?
And wilt thou call a cloud with thy voice, and will it obey thee with a violent shower of much rain?
And wilt thou send lightnings, and they shall go? and shall they say to thee, What is thy pleasure?
And who has given to women skill in weaving, or knowledge of embroidery?
And who is he that numbers the clouds in wisdom, and has bowed the heaven down to the earth?
For it is spread out as dusty earth, and I have cemented it as one hewn stone to another.
And wilt thou hunt a prey for the lions? and satisfy the desires of the serpents?
For they fear in their lairs, and lying in wait couch in the woods.
And who has prepared food for the raven? for its young ones wander and cry to the Lord, in search of food.
And the angel that talked with me returned, and awakened me, as when a man is awakened out of his sleep.
And he said to me, What seest thou? And I said, I have seen, and behold a candlestick all of gold, and its bowl upon it, and seven lamps upon it, and seven oil funnels to the lamps upon it:
and two olive-trees above it, one on the right of the bowl, and one on the left.
And I inquired, and spoke to the angel that talked with me, saying, What are these things, my lord?
And the angel that talked with me answered, and spoke to me, saying, Knowest thou not what these things are? And I said, No, my lord.
And he answered and spoke to me, saying, This is the word of the Lord to Zorobabel, saying, Not by mighty power, nor by strength, but by my Spirit, saith the Lord Almighty.
Who art thou, the great mountain before Zorobabel, that thou shouldest prosper? whereas I will bring out the stone of the inheritance, the grace of it the equal of my  grace.
And the word of the Lord came to me, saying,
The hands of Zorobabel have laid the foundation of this house, and his hands shall finish it: and thou shalt know that the Lord Almighty has sent me to thee.
For who has despised the small days? surely they shall rejoice, and shall see the plummet of tin in the hand of Zorobabel: these are the seven eyes that look upon all the earth.
And I answered, and said to him, What are these two olive-trees, which are on the right and left hand of the candlestick?
And I asked the second time, and said to him, What are the two branches of the olive-trees that are by the side of the two golden pipes that pour into and communicate with the golden oil funnels?
And he said to me, Knowest thou not what these are? and I said, No, my lord.
And he said, These are the two anointed ones that stand by the Lord of the whole earth.
Anger slays even wise men; yet a submissive answer turns away wrath: but a grievous word stirs up anger.
The tongue of the wise knows what is good: but the mouth of the foolish tells out evil things.
The eyes of the Lord behold both the evil and the good in every place.
The wholesome tongue is a tree of life, and he that keeps it shall be filled with understanding.
A fool scorns his father's instruction; but he that keeps his commandments is more prudent. In abounding righteousness is great strength: but the ungodly shall utterly perish from the earth.
In the houses of the righteous is much strength: but the fruits of the ungodly shall perish.
The lips of the wise are bound by discretion: but the hearts of the foolish are not safe.
The sacrifices of the ungodly are an abomination to the Lord; but the prayers of them that walk honestly are acceptable with him.
The ways of an ungodly man are an abomination to the Lord; but he loves those that follow after righteousness.
The instruction of the simple is known by them that pass by; but they that hate reproofs die disgracefully.
Hell and destruction are manifest to the Lord; how shall not also be the hearts of men?
An uninstructed person will not love those that reprove him; neither will he associate with the wise.
When the heart rejoices the countenance is cheerful; but when it is in sorrow, the countenance is sad.
An upright heart seeks discretion; but the mouth of the uninstructed will experience evils.
The eyes of the wicked are always looking for evil things; but the good are always quiet.
Better is a small portion with the fear of the Lord, than great treasures without the fear of the Lord.
Better is an entertainment of herbs with friendliness and kindness, than a feast of calves, with enmity.
A passionate man stirs up strife; but he that is slow to anger appeases even a rising one. A man slow to anger will extinguish quarrels; but an ungodly man rather stirs them up.
The ways of sluggards are strewn with thorns; but those of the diligent are made smooth.
A wise son gladdens his father; but a foolish son sneers at his mother.
The ways of a foolish man are void of sense; but a wise man proceeds on his way aright.
They that honour not councils put off deliberation; but counsel abides in the hearts of counsellors.
A bad man will by no means attend to counsel; neither will he say anything seasonable, or good for the common weal.
The thoughts of the wise are ways of life, that he may turn aside and escape from hell.
The Lord pulls down the houses of scorners; but he establishes the border of the widow.
An unrighteous thought is abomination to the Lord; but the sayings of the pure are held in honour.
A receiver of bribes destroys himself; but he that hates the receiving of bribes is safe. By alms and by faithful dealings sins are purged away; but by the fear of the Lord every one departs from evil.
The hearts of the righteous meditate faithfulness; but the mouth of the ungodly answers evil things. The ways of righteous men are acceptable with the Lord; and through them even enemies become friends.
God is far from the ungodly; but he hearkens to the prayers of the righteous. Better are small receipts with righteousness, than abundant fruits with unrighteousness. Let the heart of a man think justly, that his steps may be rightly ordered of God. The eye that sees rightly rejoices the heart; and a good report fattens the bones.
He that rejects instruction hates himself; but he that mind reproofs loves his soul.
The fear of the Lord is instruction and wisdom; and the highest honour will correspond therewith.
IN THE FOURTH YEAR OF JOAKIM son of Josias king of Juda, the word of the Lord came to me, saying,
Take thee a roll of a book, and write upon it all the words which I spoke to thee against Jerusalem, and against Juda, and against all the nations, from the day when I spoke to thee, from the days of Josias king of Juda, even to this day.
Perhaps the house of Juda will hear all the evils which I purpose to do to them; that they may turn from their evil way; and so I will be merciful to their iniquities and their sins.
So Jeremias called Baruch the son of Nerias: and he wrote from the mouth of Jeremias all the words of the Lord, which he had spoken to him, on a roll of a book.
And Jeremias commanded Baruch, saying, I am in prison; I cannot enter into the house of the Lord:
so thou shalt read in this roll in the ears of the people in the house of the Lord, on the fast day; and in the ears of all Juda that come out of their cities, thou shalt read to them.
Peradventure their supplication will come before the Lord, and they will turn from their evil way: for great is the wrath and the anger of the Lord, which he has pronounced against this people.
And Baruch did according to all that Jeremias commanded himreading in the book the words of the Lord in the Lord's house.
And it came to pass in the eighth year of king Joakim, in the ninth month, all the people in Jerusalem, and the house of Juda, proclaimed a fast before the Lord.
And Baruch read in the book the words of Jeremias in the house of the Lord, in the house of Gamarias son of Saphan the scribe, in the upper court, in the entrance of the new gate of the house of the Lord, and in the ears of all the people.
And Michaeas the son of Gamarias the son of Saphan heard all the words of the Lord, out of the book.
And he went down to the king's house, into the house of the scribe: and, behold, there were sitting there all the princes, Elisama the scribe, and Dalaeas the son of Selemias, and Jonathan the son of Acchobor, and Gamarias the son of Saphan, and Sedekias the son of Ananias, and all the princes.
And Michaeas reported to them all the words which he had heard Baruch reading in the ears of the people.
And all the princes sent to Baruch son of Nerias Judin the son of Nathanias, the son of Selemias, the son of Chusi, saying, Take in thine hand the roll in which thou readest in the ears of the people, and come. So Baruch took the roll, and went down to them.
And they said to him, Read it again in our ears. And Baruch read it.
And it came to pass, when they had heard all the words, that they took counsel each with his neighbour, and said, Let us by all means tell the king all these words.
And they asked Baruch, saying, Where didst thou write all these words?
And Baruch said, Jeremias told me from his own mouth all these words, and I wrote them in a book.
And they said to Baruch, Go, and hide, thou and Jeremias; let no man know where ye are.
And they went in to the king into the court, and gave the roll to one to keep in the house of Elisama; and they told the king all these words.
And the king sent Judin to fetch the roll: and he took it out of the house of Elisama: and Judin read in the ears of the king, and in the ears of all the princes who stood round the king.
Now the king was sitting in the winter house: and there was a fire on the hearth before him.
And it came to pass when Judin had read three or four leaves, he cut them off with a penknife, and cast them into the fire that was on the hearth, until the whole roll was consumed in the fire that was on the hearth.
And the king and his servants that heard all these words sought not the Lord, and rent not their garments.
But Elnathan and Godolias suggested to the king that he should burn the roll.
And the king commanded Jeremeel the king's son, and Saraeas the son of Esriel, to take Baruch and Jeremias: but they were hidden.
Then the word of the Lord came to Jeremias, after the king had burnt the roll, even all the words which Baruch wrote from the mouth of Jeremias, saying,
Again take thou another roll, and write all the words that were on the roll, which king Joakim has burnt.
And thou shalt say, Thus saith the Lord; Thou hast burnt this roll, saying, Why hast thou written therein, saying, The king of Babylon shall certainly come in, and destroy this land, and man and cattle shall fail from off it?
Therefore thus saith the Lord concerning Joakim king of Juda; He shall not have a man to sit on the throne of David: and his carcass shall be cast forth in the heat by day, and in the frost by night.
And I will visit him, and his family, and his servants: and I will bring upon him, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and upon the land of Juda, all the evils which I spoke of to them; and they hearkened not.
And Baruch took another roll, and wrote upon it from the mouth of Jeremias all the words of the book which Joakim had burnt: and there were yet more words added to it like the former.
I will exalt thee, O Lord; for thou hast lifted me up, and not caused mine enemies to rejoice over me.
O Lord my God, I cried to thee, and thou didst heal me.
O Lord, thou hast brought up my soul from Hades, thou hast delivered me from among them that go down to the pit.
Sing to the Lord, ye his saints, and give thanks for the remembrance of his holiness.
For anger is in his wrath, but life in his favour: weeping shall tarry for the evening, but joy shall be in the morning.
And I said in my prosperity, I shall never be moved.
O Lord, in thy good pleasure thou didst add strength to my beauty: but thou didst turn away thy face, and I was troubled.
To thee, O Lord, will I cry; and to my God will I make supplication.
What profit is there in my blood, when I go down to destruction? Shall the dust give praise to thee? or shall it declare thy truth?
The Lord heard, and had compassion upon me; the Lord is become my helper.
Thou hast turned my mourning into joy for me: thou hast rent off my sackcloth, and girded me with gladness;
that my glory may sing praise to thee, and I may not be pierced with sorrow. O Lord my God, I will give thanks to thee for ever.
Has the hand of the Lord no power to save? or has he made his ear heavy, so that he should not hear?
Nay, your iniquities separate between you and God, and because of your sins has he turned away his face from you, so as not to have mercy upon you.
For your hands are defiled with blood, and your fingers with sins; your lips also have spoken iniquity, and your tongue meditates unrighteousness.
None speaks justly, neither is there true judgment: they trust in vanities, and speak empty words; for they conceive trouble, and bring forth iniquity.
They have hatched asps' eggs, and weave a spider's web: and he that is going to eat of their eggs, having crushed an addled egg, has found also in it a basilisk.
Their web shall not become a garment, nor shall they at all clothe themselves with their works; for their works are works of iniquity.
And their feet run to wickedness, swift to shed blood; their thoughts also are thoughts of murder; destruction and misery are in their ways;
and the way of peace they know not, neither is there judgment in their ways; for their paths by which they go are crooked, and they know not peace.
Therefore has judgment departed from them, and righteousness shall not overtake them: while they waited for light, darkness came upon them; while they waited for brightness, they walked in perplexity.
They shall feel for the wall as blind men, and shall feel for it as if they had no eyes: and they shall feel at noon-day as at midnight; they shall groan as dying men.
They shall proceed together as a bear and as a dove: we have waited for judgment, and there is no salvation, it is gone far from us.
For our iniquity is great before thee, and our sins have risen up against us: for our iniquities are in us, and we know our unrighteous deeds.
We have sinned, and dealt falsely, and revolted from our God: we have spoken unrighteous words, and have been disobedient; we have conceived and uttered from our heart unrighteous words.
And we have turned judgment back, and righteousness has departed afar off: for truth is consumed in their ways, and they could not pass by a straight path.
And truth has been taken away, and they have turned aside their mind from understanding. And the Lord saw it, and it pleased him not that there was no judgment.
And he looked, and there was no man, and he observed, and there was none to help: so he defended them with his arm, and stablished them with his mercy.
And he put on righteousness as a breast-plate, and placed the helmet of salvation on his head; and he clothed himself with the garment of vengeance, and with his cloak,
as one about to render a recompence, even reproach to his adversaries.
So shall they of the west fear the name of the Lord, and they that come from the rising of the sun his glorious name: for the wrath of the Lord shall come as a mighty river, it shall come with fury.
And the deliverer shall come for Sion's sake, and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob.
And this shall be my covenant with them, said the Lord; My Spirit which is upon thee, and the words which I have put in thy mouth, shall never fail from thy mouth, nor from the mouth of thy seed, for the Lord has spoken it, henceforth and for ever.
For, behold, in those days and at that time, when I shall have turned the captivity of Juda and Jerusalem,
I will also gather all the Gentiles, and bring them down to the valley of Josaphat, and will plead with them there for my people and my heritage Israel, who have been dispersed among the Gentiles; and these Gentiles have divided my land,
and cast lots over my people, and have given their boys to harlots, and sold their girls for wine, and have drunk.
And what have ye to do with me, O Tyre, and Sidon, and all Galilee of the Gentiles? do ye render me a recompense? or do ye bear malice against me? quickly and speedily will I return your recompense on your own heads:
because ye have taken my silver and my gold, and ye have brought my choice ornaments into your temples;
and ye have sold the children of Juda and the children of Jerusalem to the children of the Greeks, that ye might expel them from their coasts.
Therefore, behold, I will raise them up out of the place whither ye have sold them, and I will return your recompense on your own heads.
And I will sell your sons and your daughters into the hands of the children of Juda, and they shall sell them into captivity to a far distant nation: for the Lord has spoken it.
Proclaim these things among the Gentiles; declare war, arouse the warriors, draw near and go up, all ye men of war.
Beat your ploughshares into swords, and your sickles into spears: let the weak say, I am strong.
Gather yourselves together, and go in, all ye nations round about, and gather yourselves there; let the timid become a warrior.
Let them be aroused, let all the nations go up to the valley of Josaphat: for there will I sit to judge all the Gentiles round about.
Bring forth the sickles, for the vintage is come: go in, tread the grapes, for the press is full: cause the vats to overflow; for their wickedness is multiplied.
Noises have resounded in the valley of judgment: for the day of the Lord is near in the valley of judgment.
The sun and the moon shall be darkened, and the stars shall withdraw their light.
And the Lord shall cry out of Sion, and shall utter his voice from Jerusalem; and the heaven and the earth shall be shaken, but the Lord shall spare his people, and shall strengthen the children of Israel.
And ye shall know that I am the Lord your God, who dwell in Sion my holy mountain: and Jerusalem shall be holy, and strangers shall not pass through her anymore.
And it shall come to pass in that day that the mountains shall drop sweet wine, and the hills shall flow with milk, and all the fountains of Juda shall flow with water, and a fountain shall go forth of the house of the Lord, and water the valley of flags.
Egypt shall be a desolation, and Idumea shall be a desolate plain, because of the wrongs of the children of Juda, because they have shed righteous blood in their land.
But Judea shall be inhabited for ever, and Jerusalem to all generations.
And they brought Joab word, saying, Behold, the king weeps and mourns for Abessalom.
And the victory was turned that day into mourning to all the people, for the people heard say that day, The king grieves after his son.
And the people stole away that day to go into the city, as people steal away when they are ashamed as they flee in the battle.
And the king hid his face: and the king cried with a loud voice, My son Abessalom! Abessalom my son!
And Joab went in to the king, into the house, and said, Thou hast this day shamed the faces of all thy servants that have delivered thee this day, and have saved the lives of thy sons and of thy daughters, and the lives of thy wives, and of thy concubines,
forasmuch as thou lovest them that hate thee, and hatest them that love thee; and thou hast this day declared, that thy princes and thy servants are nothing in thy sight: for I know this day, that if Abessalom were alive, and all of us dead to-day, then it would have been right in thy sight.
And now arise, and go forth, and speak comfortably to thy servants; for I have sworn by the Lord, that unless thou wilt go forth to-day, there shall not a man remain with thee this night: and know for thyself, this thing will indeed be evil to thee beyond all the evil that has come upon thee from thy youth until now.
Then the king arose, and sat in the gate: and all the people reported, saying, Behold, the king sits in the gate. And all the people went in before the king to the gate; for Israel had fled every man to his tent.
And all the people disputed among all the tribes of Israel, saying, King David delivered us from all our enemies, and he rescued us from the hand of the Philistines: and now he has fled from the land, and from his kingdom, and from Abessalom.
And Abessalom, whom we anointed over us, is dead in battle: and now why are ye silent about bringing back the king? And the word of all Israel came to the king.
And king David sent to Sadoc and Abiathar the priests, saying, Speak to the elders of Israel, saying, Why are ye the last to bring back the king to his house? whereas the word of all Israel is come to the king to his house.
Ye are my brethren, ye are my bones and my flesh: why are ye the last to bring back the king to his house?
And ye shall say to Amessai, Art thou not my bone and my flesh? and now God do so to me, and more also, if thou shalt not be commander of the host before me continually in the room of Joab.
And he bowed the heart of all the men of Juda as that of one man; and they sent to the king, saying, Return thou, and all thy servants.
And the king returned, and came as far as Jordan. And the men of Juda came to Galgala on their way to meet the king, to cause the king to pass over Jordan.
And Semei the son of Gera, the Benjamite, of Baurim, hasted and went down with the men of Juda to meet king David.
And a thousand men of Benjamin were with him, and Siba the servant of the house of Saul, and his fifteen sons with him, and his twenty servants with him: and they went directly down to Jordan before the king,
and they performed the service of bringing the king over; and there went over a ferry-boat to remove the household of the king, and to do that which was right in his eyes. And Semei the son of Gera fell on his face before the king, as he went over Jordan;
and said to the king, Let not my lord now impute iniquity, and remember not all the iniquity of thy servant in the day in which my lord went out from Jerusalem, so that the king should mind it.
For thy servant knows that I have sinned: and, behold, I am come to-day before all Israel and the house of Joseph, to go down and meet my lord the king.
And Abessai the son of Saruia answered and said, Shall not Semei therefore be put to death, because he cursed the Lord's anointed?
And David said, What have I to do with you, ye sons of Saruia, that ye as it were lie in wait against me this day? to-day no man in Israel shall be put to death, for I know not if I this day reign over Israel.
And the king said to Semei, Thou shalt not die: and the king swore to him.
And Memphibosthe the son of Saul's son went down to meet the king, and had not dressed his feet, nor pared his nails, nor shaved himself, neither had he washed his garments, from the day that the king departed, until the day when he arrived in peace.
And it came to pass when he went into Jerusalem to meet the king, that the king said to him, Why didst thou not go with me, Memphibosthe?
And Memphibosthe said to him, My lord, O king, my servant deceived me; for thy servant said to him, Saddle me the ass, and I will ride upon it, and go with the king; for thy servant is lame.
And he has dealt deceitfully with thy servant to my lord the king: but my lord the king is as an angel of God, and do thou that which is good in thine eyes.
For all the house of my father were but as dead men before my lord the king; yet thou hast set thy servant among them that eat at thy table: and what right have I any longer even to cry to the king?
And the king said to him, Why speakest thou any longer of thy matters? I have said, Thou and Siba shall divide the land.
And Memphibosthe said to the king, Yea, let him take all, since my lord the king has come in peace to his house.
And Berzelli the Galaadite came down from Rogellim, and crossed over Jordan with the king, that he might conduct the king over Jordan.
And Berzelli was a very old man, eighty years old; and he had maintained the king when he dwelt in Manaim; for he was a very great man.
And the king said to Berzelli, Thou shalt go over with me, and I will nourish thine old age with me in Jerusalem.
And Berzelli said to the king, How many are the days of the years of my life, that I should go up with the king to Jerusalem?
I am this day eighty years old: can I then distinguish between good and evil? Can thy servant taste any longer what I eat or drink? can I any longer hear the voice of singing men or singing women? and wherefore shall thy servant any longer be a burden to my lord the king?
Thy servant will go a little way over Jordan with the king: and why does the king return me this recompense?
Let, I pray thee, thy servant remain, and I will die in my city, by the tomb of my father and of my mother. And, behold, thy servant Chamaam shall go over with my lord the king; and do thou to him as it seems good in thine eyes.
And the king said, Let Chamaam go over with me, and I will do to him what is good in my sight; and whatsoever thou shalt choose at my hand, I will do for thee.
And all the people went over Jordan, and the king went over; and the king kissed Berzelli, and blessed him; and he returned to his place.
And the king went over to Galgala, and Chamaam went over with him: and all the men of Juda went over with the king, and also half the people of Israel.
And behold, all the men of Israel came to the king, and said to the king, Why have our brethren the men of Juda stolen thee away, and caused the king and all his house to pass over Jordan, and all the men of David with him?
And all the men of Juda answered the men of Israel, and said, Because the king is near of kin to us: and why were you thus angry concerning this matter? have we indeed eaten of the king's food? or has he given us a gift, or has he sent us a portion?
And the men of Israel answered the men of Juda, and said, We have ten parts in the king, and we are older than you, we have also an interest in David above you: and why have ye thus insulted us, and why was not our advice taken before that of Juda, to bring back our king? And the speech of the men of Juda was sharper than the speech of the men of Israel.
AND THE WORD OF THE LORD CAME TO JEREMIAS CONCERNING THE DROUGHT.
Judea has mourned, and her gates are emptied, and are darkened upon the earth; and the cry of Jerusalem is gone up.
And her nobles have sent their little ones to the water: they came to the wells, and found no water: and brought back their vessels empty.
And the labours of the land failed, because there was no rain: the husbandmen were ashamed, they covered their heads.
And hinds calved in the field, and forsook it, because there was no grass.
The wild asses stood by the forests, and snuffed up the wind; their eyes failed, because there was no grass.
Our sins have risen up against us: O Lord, do thou for us for thine own sake; for our sins are many before thee; for we have sinned against thee.
O Lord, thou art the hope of Israel, and deliverest us in time of troubles; why art thou become as a sojourner upon the land, or as one born in the land, yet turning aside for a resting-place?
Wilt thou be as a man asleep, or as a strong man that cannot save? yet thou art among us, O Lord, and thy name is called upon us; forget us not.
Thus saith the Lord to this people, They have loved to wander, and they have not spared, therefore God has not prospered them; now will he remember their iniquity.
And the Lord said to me, Pray not for this people for their good:
for though they fast, I will not hear their supplication; and though they offer whole-burnt-offerings and sacrifices, I will take no pleasure in them: for I will consume them with sword, and with famine, and with pestilence.
And I said, O ever living Lord! behold, their prophets prophesy, and say, Ye shall not see a sword, nor shall famine be among you; for I will give truth and peace on the land, and in this place.
Then the Lord said to me, The prophets prophesy lies in my name: I sent them not, and I commanded them not, and I spoke not to them: for they prophesy to you false visions, and divinations, and auguries, and devices of their own heart.
Therefore thus saith the Lord concerning the prophets that prophesy lies in my name, and I sent them not, who say, Sword and famine shall not be upon this land; they shall die by a grievous death, and the prophets shall be consumed by famine.
And the people to whom they prophesy, they also shall be cast out in the streets of Jerusalem, because of the sword and famine; and there shall be none to bury them: their wives also, and their sons, and their daughters shall die thus; and I will pour out their wickedness upon them.
And thou shalt speak this word to them; Let your eyes shed tears day and night, and let them not cease: for the daughter of my people has been sorely bruised, and her plague is very grievous.
If I go forth into the plain, then behold the slain by the sword! and if I enter into the city, then behold the distress of famine! for priest and prophet have gone to a land which they knew not.
Hast thou utterly rejected Juda? and has thy soul departed from Sion? wherefore has thou smitten us, and there is no healing for us? we waited for peace, but there was no prosperity; for a time of healing, and behold trouble!
My son, if thou come to serve the Lord, prepare thy soul for temptation.
Set thy heart aright, and constantly endure, and make not haste in time of trouble.
Cleave unto him, and depart not away, that thou mayest be increased at thy last end.
Whatsoever is brought upon thee take cheerfully, and be patient when thou art changed to a low estate.
For gold is tried in the fire, and acceptable men in the furnace of adversity.
Believe in him, and he will help thee; order thy way aright, and trust in him.
Ye that fear the Lord, wait for his mercy; and go not aside, lest ye fall.
Ye that fear the Lord, believe him; and your reward shall not fail.
Ye that fear the Lord, hope for good, and for everlasting joy and mercy.
Look at the generations of old, and see; did ever any trust in the Lord, and was confounded? or did any abide in his fear, and was forsaken? or whom did he ever despise, that called upon him?
For the Lord is full of compassion and mercy, longsuffering, and very pitiful, and forgiveth sins, and saveth in time of affliction.
Woe be to fearful hearts, and faint hands, and the sinner that goeth two ways!
Woe unto him that is fainthearted! for he believeth not; therefore shall he not be defended.
Woe unto you that have lost patience! and what will ye do when the Lord shall visit you?
They that fear the Lord will not disobey his Word; and they that love him will keep his ways.
They that fear the Lord will seek that which is well, pleasing unto him; and they that love him shall be filled with the law.
They that fear the Lord will prepare their hearts, and humble their souls in his sight,
Saying, We will fall into the hands of the Lord, and not into the hands of men: for as his majesty is, so is his mercy.
And if thou shouldest go into the corn field of thy neighbour, then thou mayest gather the ears with thy hands; but thou shalt not put the sickle to thy neighbour's corn.
And if thou shouldest go into the vineyard of thy neighbour, thou shalt eat grapes sufficient to satisfy thy desire; but thou mayest not put them into a vessel.
And if any one should take a wife, and should dwell with her, then it shall come to pass if she should not have found favour before him, because he has found some unbecoming thing in her, that he shall write for her a bill of divorcement, and give it into her hands, and he shall send her away out of his house.
And if she should go away and be married to another man;
and the last husband should hate her, and write for her a bill of divorcement; and should give it into her hands, and send her away out of his house, and the last husband should die, who took her to himself for a wife;
the former husband who sent her away shall not be able to return and take her to himself for a wife, after she has been defiled; because it is an abomination before the Lord thy God, and ye shall not defile the land, which the Lord thy God gives thee to inherit.
And if any one should have recently taken a wife, he shall not go out to war, neither shall any thing be laid upon him; he shall be free in his house; for one year he shall cheer his wife whom he has taken.
Thou shalt not take for a pledge the under millstone, nor the upper millstone; for he who does so takes life for a pledge.
And if a man should be caught stealing one of his brethren of the children of Israel, and having overcome him he should sell him, that thief shall die; so shalt thou remove that evil one from yourselves.
Take heed to thyself in regard of the plague of leprosy: thou shalt take great heed to do according to all the law, which the priests the Levites shall report to you; take heed to do, as I have charged you.
Remember all that the Lord thy God did to Mariam in the way, when ye were going out of Egypt.
If thy neighbour owe thee a debt, any debt whatsoever, thou shalt not go into his house to take his pledge:
thou shalt stand without, and the man who is in thy debt shall bring the pledge out to thee.
And if the man be poor, thou shalt not sleep with his pledge.
Thou shalt surely restore his pledge at sunset, and he shall sleep in his garment, and he shall bless thee; and it shall be mercy to thee before the Lord thy God.
Thou shalt not unjustly withhold the wages of the poor and needy of thy brethren, or of the strangers who are in thy cities.
Thou shalt pay him his wages the same day, the sun shall not go down upon it, because he is poor and he trusts in it; and he shall cry against thee to the Lord, and it shall be sin in thee.
The fathers shall not be put to death for the children, and the sons shall not be put to death for the fathers; every one shall be put to death for his own sin.
Thou shalt not wrest the judgment of the stranger and the fatherless, and widow; thou shalt not take the widow's garment for a pledge.
And thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in the land of Egypt, and the Lord thy God redeemed thee from thence; therefore I charge thee to do this thing.
And when thou shalt have reaped corn in thy field, and shalt have forgotten a sheaf in thy field, thou shalt not return to take it; it shall be for the stranger, and the orphan, and the widow, that the Lord thy God may bless thee in all the works of thy hands.
And if thou shouldest gather thine olives, thou shalt not return to collect the remainder; it shall be for the stranger, and the fatherless, and the widow, and thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in the land of Egypt; therefore I command thee to do this thing.
And when soever thou shalt gather the grapes of thy vineyard, thou shalt not glean what thou hast left; it shall be for the stranger, and the orphan, and the widow:
and thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in the land of Egypt; therefore I command thee to do this thing.
It is a good thing to give thanks to the Lord, and to sing praises to thy name, O thou Most High;
to proclaim thy mercy in the morning, and thy truth by night,
on a psaltery of ten strings, with a song on the harp.
For thou, O Lord, hast made me glad with thy work: and in the operations of thy hands will I exult.
How have thy works been magnified, O Lord! thy thoughts are very deep.
A foolish man will not know, and a senseless man will not understand this.
When the sinners spring up as the grass, and all the workers of iniquity have watched; it is that they may be utterly destroyed for ever.
But thou, O Lord, art most high for ever.
For, behold, thine enemies shall perish; and all the workers of iniquity shall be scattered.
But my horn shall be exalted as the horn of a unicorn; and mine old age with rich mercy.
And mine eye has seen mine enemies, and mine ear shall hear the wicked that rise up against me.
The righteous shall flourish as a palm-tree: he shall be increased as the cedar in Libanus.
They that are planted in the house of the Lord shall flourish in the courts of our God.
Then shall they be increased in a fine old age; and they shall be prosperous; that they may declare
that the Lord my God is righteous, and there is no iniquity in him.
They have divided their hearts; now shall they be utterly destroyed: he shall dig down their altars, their pillars shall mourn.
Because now they shall say, We have no king, because we feared not the Lord:
and what should a king do for us, speaking false professions as his words? he will make a covenant: judgment shall spring up as a weed on the soil of the field.
The inhabitants of Samaria shall dwell near the calf of the house of On; for the people of it mourned for it: and as they provoked him, they shall rejoice at his glory, because he has departed from them.
And having bound it for the Assyrians, they carried it away as presents to king Jarim: Ephraim shall receive a gift, and Israel shall be ashamed of his counsel.
Samaria has cast off her king as a twig on the surface of the water.
And the altars of On, the sins of Israel, shall be taken away: thorns and thistles shall come up on their altars; and they shall say to the mountains, Cover us; and to the hills, Fall on us.
From the time the hills existed Israel has sinned: there they stood: war waged against the children of iniquity
And Sampson went to Gaza, and saw there a harlot, and went in to her.
And it was reported to the Gazites, saying, Sampson is come hither: and they compassed him and laid wait for him all night in the gate of the city, and they were quiet all the night, saying, Let us wait till the dawn appear, and we will slay him.
And Sampson slept till midnight, and rose up at midnight, and took hold of the doors of the gate of the city with the two posts, and lifted them up with the bar, and laid them on his shoulders, and he went up to the top of the mountain that is before Chebron, and laid them there.
And it came to pass after this that he loved a woman in Alsorech, and her name was Dalida.
And the princess of the Philistines came up to her, and said to her, Beguile him, and see wherein his great strength is, and wherewith we shall prevail against him, and bind him to humble him; and we will give thee each eleven hundred pieces of silver.
And Dalida said to Sampson, Tell me, I pray thee, wherein is thy great strength, and wherewith thou shalt be bound that thou mayest be humbled.
And Sampson said to her, If they bind me with seven moist cords that have not been spoiled, then shall I be weak and be as one of ordinary men.
And the princess of the Philistines brought to her seven moist cords that had not been spoiled, and she bound him with them.
And the liers in wait remained with her in the chamber; and she said to him, the Philistines are upon thee, Sampson: and he broke the cords as if any one should break a thread of tow when it has touched the fire, and his strength was not known.
And Dalida said to Sampson, Behold, thou hast cheated me, and told me lies; now then tell me wherewith thou shalt be bound.
And he said to her, If they should bind me fast with new ropes with which work has not been done, then shall I be weak, and shall be as another man.
And Dalida took new ropes, and bound him with them, and the liers in wait came out of the chamber, and she said, The Philistines are upon thee, Sampson: and he broke them off his arms like a thread.
And Dalida said to Sampson, Behold, thou hast deceived me, and told me lies; tell me, I intreat thee, wherewith thou mayest be bound: and he said to her, If thou shouldest weave the seven locks of my head with the web, and shouldest fasten them with the pin into the wall, then shall I be weak as another man.
And it came to pass when he was asleep, that Dalida took the seven locks of his head, and wove them with the web, and fastened them with the pin into the wall, and she said, The Philistines are upon thee, Sampson: and he awoke out of his sleep, and carried away the pin of the web out of the wall.
And Dalida said to Sampson, How sayest thou, I love thee, when thy heart is not with me? this third time thou hast deceived me, and hast not told me wherein is thy great strength.
And it came to pass as she pressed him sore with her words continually, and straitened him, that his spirit failed almost to death.
Then he told her all his heart, and said to her, A razor has not come upon my head, because I have been a holy one of God from my mother's womb; if then I should be shaven, my strength will depart from me, and I shall be weak, and I shall be as all other men.
And Dalida saw that he told her all his heart, and she sent and called the princess of the Philistines, saying, Come up yet this once; for he has told me all his heart. And the chiefs of the Philistines went up to her, and brought the money in their hands.
And the Lord sent Nathan the prophet to David; and he went in to him, and said to him, There were two men in one city, one rich and the other poor.
And the rich man had very many flocks and herds.
But the poor man had only one little ewe lamb, which he had purchased, and preserved, and reared; an it grew up with himself and his children in common; it ate of his bread and drank of his cup, and slept in his bosom, and was to him as a daughter.
And a traveller came to the rich man, and he spared to take of his flocks and of his herds, to dress for the traveller that came to him; and he took the poor man's lamb, and dressed it for the man that came to him.
And David was greatly moved with anger against the man; and David said to Nathan, As the Lord lives, the man that did this thing shall surely die.
And he shall restore the lamb seven-fold, because he has not spared.
And Nathan said to David, Thou art the man that has done this. Thus says the Lord God of Israel, I anointed thee to be king over Israel, and I rescued thee out the hand of Saul;
and I gave thee the house of thy lord, and the wives of thy lord into thy bosom, and I gave to thee the house of Israel and Juda; and if that had been little, I would have given thee yet more.
Why hast thou set at nought the word of the Lord, to do that which is evil in his eyes? thou hast slain Urias the Chettite with the sword, and thou hast taken his wife to be thy wife, and thou hast slain him with the sword of the children of Ammon.
Now therefore the sword shall not depart from thy house for ever, because thou has set me at nought, and thou hast taken the wife of Urias the Chettite, to be thy wife.
Thus says the Lord, Behold, I will raise up against thee evil out of thy house, and I will take thy wives before thine eyes, and will give them to thy neighbour, and he shall lie with thy wives in the sight of this sun.
For thou didst it secretly, but I will do this thing in the sight of all Israel, and before the sun.
And David said to Nathan, I have sinned against the Lord. And Nathan said to David, And the Lord has put away thy sin; thou shalt not die.
Only because thou hast given great occasion of provocation to the enemies of the Lord by this thing, thy son also that is born to thee shall surely die.
And Nathan departed to his house. And the Lord smote the child, which the wife of Urias the Chettite bore to David, and it was ill.
And David enquired of God concerning the child, and David fasted, and went in and lay all night upon the ground.
And the elders of his house arose and went to him to raise him up from the ground, but he would not rise, nor did he eat bread with them.
And it came to pass on the seventh day that the child died: and the servants of David were afraid to tell him that the child was dead; for they said, Behold, while the child was yet alive we spoke to him, and he hearkened not to our voice; and thou should we tell him that the child is dead?so would he do himself harm.
And David understood that his servants were whispering, and David perceived that the child was dead: and David said to his servants, Is the child dead? and they said, He is dead.
Then David rose up from the earth, and washed, and anointed himself, and changed his raiment, and went into the house of God, and worshipped him; and went into his own house, and called for bread to eat, and they set bread before him and he ate.
And his servants said to him, What is this thing that thou hast done concerning the child? while it was yet living thou didst fast, and weep, and watch: and when the child was dead thou didst rise up, and didst eat bread, and drink.
And David said, While the child yet lived, I fasted and wept; for I said, Who knows if the Lord will pity me, and the child live?
But now it is dead, why should I fast thus? shall I be able to bring him back again? I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me.
And David comforted Bersabee his wife, and he went in to her, and lay with her; and she conceived and bore a son, and he called his named Solomon, and the Lord loved him.
And he sent by the hand of Nathan the prophet, and called his name Jeddedi, for the Lord's sake.
And Joab fought against Rabbath of the children of Ammon, and took the royal city.
And Joab sent messengers to David, and said, I have fought against Rabbath, and taken the city of waters.
And now gather the rest of the people, and encamp against the city, an take it beforehand; lest I take the city first, and my name be called upon it.
And David gathered all the people, and went to Rabbath, and fought against it, and took it.
And he took the crown of Molchom their king from off his head, and the weight of it was a talent of gold, with precious stones, and it was upon the head of David; and he carried forth very much spoil of the city.
And he brought forth the people that were in it, and put them under the saw, and under iron harrows, and axes of iron, and made them pass through the brick-kiln: and thus he did to all the cities of the children of Ammon. And David and all the people returned to Jerusalem.
God is known in Judea: his name is great in Israel.
And his place has been in peace, and his dwelling-place in Sion.
There he broke the power of the bows, the shield, and the sword, and the battle. Pause.
Thou dost wonderfully shine forth from the everlasting mountains.
All the simple ones in heart were troubled; all the men of wealth have slept their sleep, and have found nothing in their hands.
At thy rebuke, O God of Jacob, the riders on horses slumbered.
Thou art terrible; and who shall withstand thee, because of thine anger?
Thou didst cause judgment to be heard from heaven; the earth feared, and was still,
when God arose to judgment, to save all the meek in heart. Pause.
For the inward thought of man shall give thanks to thee: and the memorial of his inward thought shall keep a feast to thee.
Vow, and pay your vows to the Lord our God; all that are round about him shall bring gifts, even to him that is terrible,
and that takes away the spirits of princes; to him that is terrible among the kings of the earth.
Be not jealous over the wife of thy bosom, and teach her not an evil lesson against thyself.
Give not thy soul unto a woman to set her foot upon thy substance.
Meet not with an harlot, lest thou fall into her snares.
Use not much the company of a woman that is a singer, lest thou be taken with her attempts.
Gaze not on a maid, that thou fall not by those things that are precious in her.
Give not thy soul unto harlots, that thou lose not thine inheritance.
Look not round about thee in the streets of the city, neither wander thou in the solitary place thereof.
Turn away thine eye from a beautiful woman, and look not upon another's beauty; for many have been deceived by the beauty of a woman; for herewith love is kindled as a fire.
Sit not at all with another man's wife, nor sit down with her in thine arms, and spend not thy money with her at the wine; lest thine heart incline unto her, and so through thy desire thou fall into destruction.
Forsake not an old friend; for the new is not comparable to him: a new friend is as new wine; when it is old, thou shalt drink it with pleasure.
Envy not the glory of a sinner: for thou knowest not what shall be his end.
Delight not in the thing that the ungodly have pleasure in; but remember they shall not go unpunished unto their grave.
Keep thee far from the man that hath power to kill; so shalt thou not doubt the fear of death: and if thou come unto him, make no fault, lest he take away thy life presently: remember that thou goest in the midst of snares, and that thou walkest upon the battlements of the city.
As near as thou canst, guess at thy neighbour, and consult with the wise.
Let thy talk be with the wise, and all thy communication in the law of the most High.
And let just men eat and drink with thee; and let thy glorying be in the fear of the Lord.
For the hand of the artificer the work shall be commended: and the wise ruler of the people for his speech.
A man of an ill tongue is dangerous in his city; and he that is rash in his talk shall be hated.
Be ye gathered and closely joined together, O unchastened nation;
before ye become as the flower that passes away, before the anger of the Lord come upon you, before the day of the wrath of the Lord come upon you.
In the third year of Cyrus king of the Persians a thing was revealed to Daniel, whose name was called Baltasar; and the thing was true, and great power and understanding in the vision was given to him.
On the twenty-fourth day of the first month, I was near the great river, which is Tigris Eddekel.
And I lifted up mine eyes, and looked, and behold a man clothed in linen, and his loins were girt with gold of Ophaz:
and his body was as Tharsis, and his face was a the appearance of lightning, and his eyes as lamps of fire, and his arms and his legs as the appearance of shining brass, and the voice of his words as the voice of a multitude.
And I Daniel only saw the vision: and the men that were with me saw not the vision; but a great amazement fell upon them, and they fled in fear.
So I was left alone, and saw this great vision, and there was no strength left in me, and my glory was turned into corruption, and I retained no strength.
Yet I heard the voice of his words: and when I heard him I was pricked in the heart, and I fell with my face to the earth.
And, behold, a hand touched me, and it raised me on my knees.
And he said to me, O Daniel, man greatly beloved, understand the words which I speak to thee, and stand upright: for I am now sent to thee. And when he had spoken to me this word, I stood trembling.
Now I will sing to my beloved a song of my beloved concerning my vineyard. My beloved had a vineyard on a high hill in a fertile place.
And I made a hedge round it, and dug a trench, and planted a choice vine, and built a tower in the midst of it, and dug a place for the wine-vat in it: and I waited for it to bring forth grapes, and it brought forth thorns.
And now, ye dwellers in Jerusalem, and every man of Juda, judge between me and my vineyard.
What shall I do any more to my vineyard, that I have not done to it? Whereas I expected it to bring forth grapes, but it has brought forth thorns.
And now I will tell you what I will do to my vineyard: I will take away its hedge, and it shall be for a spoil; and I will pull down its walls, and it shall be left to be trodden down.
And I will forsake my vineyard; and it shall not be pruned, nor dug, and thorns shall come up upon it as on barren land; and I will command the clouds to rain no rain upon it.
For the vineyard of the Lord of hosts is the house of Israel, and the men of Juda his beloved plant: I expected it to bring forth judgment, and it brought forth iniquity; and not righteousness, but a cry.
Woe to them that join house to house, and add field to field, that they may take away something of their neighbor's: will ye dwell alone upon the land?
For these things have reached the ears of the Lord of hosts: for though many houses should be built, many and fair houses shall be desolate, and there shall be no inhabitants in them.
For where ten yoke of oxen plough the land shall yield one jar-full, and he that sows six homers shall produce three measures.
Woe to them that rise up in the morning, and follow strong drink; who wait at it till evening: for the wine shall inflame them.
For they drink wine with harp, and psaltery, and drums, and pipes: but they regard not the works of the Lord, and consider not the works of his hands.
Therefore my people have been taken captive, because they know not the Lord: and there has been a multitude of dead bodies, because of hunger and of thirst for water.
Therefore hell has enlarged its desire and opened its mouth without ceasing: and her glorious and great, and her rich and her pestilent men shall go down into it.
And the mean man shall be brought low, and the great man shall be disgraced, and the lofty eyes shall be brought low.
But the Lord of hosts shall be exalted in judgment, and the holy God shall be glorified in righteousness.
And they that were spoiled shall be fed as bulls, and lambs shall feed on the waste places of them that are taken away.
Woe to them that draw sins to them as with a long rope, and iniquities as with a thong of the heifer's yoke:
who say, Let him speedily hasten what he will do, that we may see it: and let the counsel of the Holy One of Israel come, that we may know it.
Woe to them that call evil good, and good evil; who make darkness light, and light darkness; who make bitter sweet, and sweet bitter.
Woe to them that are wise in their own conceit, and knowing in their own sight.
Woe to the strong ones of you that drink wine, and the mighty ones that mingle strong drink:
who justify the ungodly for rewards, and take away the righteousness of the righteous.
Therefore as stubble shall be burnt by a coal of fire, and shall be consumed by a violent flame, their root shall be as chaff, and their flower shall go up as dust: for they rejected the law of the Lord of hosts, and insulted the word of the Holy One of Israel.
Therefore the Lord of hosts was greatly angered against his people, and he reached forth his hand upon them, and smote them: and the mountains were troubled, and their carcasses were as dung in the midst of the way: yet for all this his anger has not been turned away, but his hand is yet raised.
Therefore shall he lift up a signal to the nations that are afar, and shall hiss for them from the end of the earth; and, behold, they are coming very quickly.
They shall not hunger nor be weary, neither shall they slumber nor sleep; neither shall they loose their girdles from their loins, neither shall their shoe-latchets be broken.
Whose arrows are sharp, and their bows bent; their horses' hoofs are counted as solid rock: their chariot-wheels are as a storm.
They rage as lions, and draw nigh as a lion's whelps: and he shall seize, and roar as a wild beast, and he shall cast them forth, and there shall be none to deliver them.
And he shall roar on account of them in that day, as the sound of the swelling sea; and they shall look to the land, and, behold, there shall be thick darkness in their perplexity.
O Lord, my heart is not exalted, neither have mine eyes been haughtily raised: neither have I exercised myself in great matters, nor in things too wonderful for me.
I shall have sinned if I have not been humble, but have exulted my soul: according to the relation of a weaned child to his mother, so wilt thou recompense my soul.
Let Israel hope in the Lord, from henceforth and for ever.
So I returned, and saw all the oppressions that were done under the sun: and behold the tear of the oppressed, and they had no comforter; and on the side of them that oppressed them was power; but they had no comforter:
and I praised all the dead that had already died more than the living, as many as are alive until now.
Better also than both these is he who has not yet been, who has not seen all the evil work that is done under the sun.
And I saw all labour, and all the diligent work, that this is a man's envy from his neighbour. This is also vanity and waywardness of spirit.
The fool folds his hands together, and eats his own flesh.
Better is a handful of rest than two handfuls of trouble and waywardness of spirit.
So I returned, and saw vanity under the sun.
There is one alone, and there is not a second; yea, he has neither son nor brother: yet there is no end to all his labour; neither is his eye satisfied with wealth; and for whom do I labour, and deprive my soul of good? this is also vanity, and an evil trouble.
Two are better than one, seeing they have a good reward for their labour.
For if they fall, the one will lift up his fellow: but woe to him that is alone when he falls, and there is not a second to lift him up.
Also if two should lie together, they also get heat: but how shall one be warmed alone?
And if one should prevail against him, the two shall withstand him; and a threefold cord shall not be quickly broken.
Better is a poor and wise child than an old and foolish king, who knows not how to take heed any longer.
For he shall come forth out of the house of the prisoners to reign, because he also that was in his kingdom has become poor.
I beheld all the living who were walking under the sun, with the second youth who shall stand up in each one's place.
There is no end to all the people, to all who were before them: and the last shall not rejoice in him: for this also is vanity and waywardness of spirit.
Keep thy foot, whensoever thou goest to the house of God; and when thou art near to hear, let thy sacrifice be better than the gift of fools: for they know not that they are doing evil.
Then Baldad the Sauchite answered and said,
What beginning or fear is hiseven he that makes all things in the highest?
For let none think that there is a respite for robbers: and upon whom will there not come a snare from him?
For how shall a mortal be just before the Lord? or who that is born of a woman shall purify himself?
If he gives an order to the moon, then it shines not; and the stars are not pure before him.
But alas! man is corruption, and the son of man a worm.
Now it came to pass in the seventh month that Ismael the son of Nathanias the son of Eleasa of the seed royal, came, and ten men with him, to Godolias to Massepha: and they ate bread there together.
And Ismael rose up, and the ten men that were with him, and smote Godolias, whom the king of Babylon had appointed governor over the land,
and all the Jews that were with him in Massepha, and all the Chaldeans that were found there.
And it came to pass on the second day after he had smitten Godolias, and no man knew of it,
that there came men from Sychem, and from Salem, and from Samaria, even eighty men, having their beards shaven, and their clothes rent, and beating their breasts, and they had manna and frankincense in their hands, to bring them into the house of the Lord.
And Ismael went out to meet them; and they went on and wept: and he said to them, Come in to Godolias.
And it came to pass, when they had entered into the midst of the city, that he slew them and cast them into a pit.
But ten men were found there, and they said to Ismael, Slay us not: for we have treasures in the field, wheat and barley, honey and oil. So he passed by, and slew them not in the midst of their brethren.
Now the pit into which Ismael cast all whom he smote, is the great pit, which king Asa had made for fear of Baasa king of Israel: even this Ismael filled with slain men.
And Ismael brought back all the people that were left in Massepha, and the king's daughter, whom the captain of the guard had committed in charge to Godolias the son of Achicam: and he went away beyond the children of Ammon.
And Joanan the son of Caree, and all the leaders of the host that were with him, heard of all the evil deeds which Ismael had done.
And they brought all their army, and went to fight against him, and found him near much water in Gabaon.
And it came to pass, when all the people that was with Ismael saw Joanan, and the leaders of the host that was with him,
that they returned to Joanan.
But Ismael escaped with eight men and went to the children of Ammon.
And Joanan, and all the leaders of the host that were with him, took all the remnant of the people, whom he had brought back from Ismael, mighty men in war, and the women, and the other property, and the eunuchs, whom they had brought back from Gabaon:
and they departed, and dwelt in Gaberoch-amaa, that is by Bethleem, to go into Egypt, for fear of the Chaldeans:
for they were afraid of them, because Ismael had smitten Godolias, whom the king of Babylon made governor in the land.
And David said in his heart, Now shall I be one day delivered for death into the hands of Saul; and there is no good thing for me unless I should escape into the land of the Philistines, and Saul should cease from seeking me through every coast of Israel: so I shall escape out of his hand.
So David arose, and the six hundred men that were with him, and he went to Anchus, son Ammach, king of Geth.
And David dwelt with Anchus, he and his men, each with his family; and David and both his wives, Achinaam, the Jezraelitess, and Abigaia the wife of Nabal the Carmelite.
And it was told Saul that David had fled to Geth; and he no longer sought after him.
And David said to Anchus, If now thy servant has found grace in thine eyes, let them give me, I pray thee, a place in one of the cities in the country, and I will dwell there: for why does thy servant dwell with thee in a royal city?
And he gave him Sekelac in that day: therefore Sekelac came into possession of the king of Judea to this day.
And the number of the days that David dwelt in the country of the Philistines was four months.
And David and his men went up, and made an attack on all the Gesirites and on the Amalekites: and behold, the land was inhabited, (even the land from Gelampsur) by those who come from the fortified cities even to the land of Egypt.
And he smote the land, and saved neither man nor woman alive; and they took flocks, and herds, and asses, and camels, and raiment; and they returned and came to Anchus.
And Anchus said to David, On whom have ye made an attack to-day? And David said to Anchus, On the south of Judea, and on the south of Jesmega, and on the south of the Kenezite.
And I have not saved man or woman alive to bring them to Geth, saying, Lest they carry a report to Geth against us, saying, These things David does. And this was his manner all the days that David dwelt in the country of the Philistines.
So David had the full confidence of Anchus, who said, He is thoroughly disgraced among his people in Israel and he shall be my servant for ever.
The Lord tends me as a shepherd, and I shall want nothing.
In a place of green grass, there he has made me dwell: he has nourished me by the water of rest.
He has restored my soul: he has guided me into the paths of righteousness, for his name's sake.
Yea, even if I should walk in the midst of the shadow of death, I will not be afraid of evils: for thou art with me; thy rod and thy staff, these have comforted me.
Thou has prepared a table before me in presence of them that afflict me: thou hast thoroughly anointed my head with oil; and thy cup cheers me like the best wine.
Thy mercy also shall follow me all the days of my life: and my dwelling shall be in the house of the Lord for a very long time.
And Moses answered and said, If they believe me not, and do not hearken to my voice (for they will say, God has not appeared to thee), what shall I say to them?
And the Lord said to him, What is this thing that is in thine hand? and he said, A rod.
And he said, Cast it on the ground: and he cast it on the ground, and it became a serpent, and Moses fled from it.
And the Lord said to Moses, Stretch forth thine hand, and take hold of its tail: so he stretched forth his hand and took hold of the tail,
and it became a rod in his hand, that they may believe thee, that the God of thy fathers has appeared to thee, the God of Abraam, and God of Isaac, and God of Jacob.
And the Lord said again to him, Put thine hand into thy bosom; and he put his hand into his bosom, and brought his hand out of his bosom, and his hand became as snow.
And he said again, Put thy hand into thy bosom; and he put his hand into his bosom, and brought his hand out of his bosom, and it was again restored to the complexion of his other flesh.
And if they will not believe thee, nor hearken to the voice of the first sign, they will believe thee because of the voice of the second sign.
And it shall come to pass if they will not believe thee for these two signs, and will not hearken to thy voice, that thou shalt take of the water of the river and pour it upon the dry land, and the water which thou shalt take from the river shall be blood upon the dry land.
And Moses said to the Lord, I pray, Lord, I have not been sufficient in former times, neither from the time that thou hast begun to speak to thy servant: I am weak in speech, and slow-tongued.
And the Lord said to Moses, Who has given a mouth to man, and who has made the very hard of hearing, and the deaf, the seeing and the blind? have not I, God?
And now go and I will open thy mouth, and will instruct thee in what thou shalt say.
And Moses said, I pray thee, Lord, appoint another able person whom thou shalt send.
And the Lord was greatly angered against Moses, and said, Lo! is not Aaron the Levite thy brother? I know that he will surely speak to thee; and, behold, he will come forth to meet thee, and beholding thee he will rejoice within himself.
And thou shalt speak to him; and thou shalt put my words into his mouth, and I will open thy mouth and his mouth, and I will instruct you in what ye shall do.
And he shall speak for thee to the people, and he shall be thy mouth, and thou shalt be for him in things pertaining to God.
And this rod that was turned into a serpent thou shalt take in thine hand, wherewith thou shalt work miracles.
And Moses went and returned to Jothor his father-in-law, and says, I will go and return to my brethren in Egypt, and will see if they are yet living. And Jothor said to Moses, Go in health. And in those days after some time, the king of Egypt died.
And the Lord said to Moses in Madiam, Go, depart into Egypt, for all that sought thy life are dead.
And Moses took his wife and his children, and mounted them on the beasts, and returned to Egypt; and Moses took the rod which he had from God in his hand.
And the Lord said to Moses, When thou goest and returnest to Egypt, seeall the miracles I have charged thee with, thou shalt work before Pharao: and I will harden his heart, and he shall certainly not send away the people.
And thou shalt say to Pharao, These things saith the Lord, Israel is my first-born.
And I said to thee, Send away my people, that they may serve me: now if thou wilt not send them away, see, I will slay thy first-born son.
And it came to pass that the angel of the Lord met him by the way in the inn, and sought to slay him.
and Sepphora having taken a stone cut off the foreskin of her son, and fell at his feet and said, The blood of the circumcision of my son is staunched:
and he departed from him, because she said, The blood of the circumcision of my son is staunched.
And the Lord said to Aaron, Go into the wilderness to meet Moses; and he went and met him in the mount of God, and they kissed each other.
And Moses reported to Aaron all the words of the Lord, which he sent, and all the things which he charged him.
And Moses and Aaron went and gathered the elders of the children of Israel.
And Aaron spoke all these words, which God spoke to Moses, and wrought the miracles before the people.
and the people believed and rejoiced, because God visited the children of Israel, and because he saw their affliction: and the people bowed and worshipped.
And the word of the Lord came to Michaeas the son of Morasthi, in the days of Joatham, and Achaz, and Ezekias, kings of Juda, concerning what he saw regarding Samaria and Jerusalem.
Hear these words, ye people; and let the earth give heed, and all that are in it: and the Lord God shall be among you for a testimony, the Lord out of his holy habitation.
For, behold, the Lord comes forth out of his place, and will come down, and will go upon the high places of the earth.
And the mountains shall be shaken under him, and the valleys shall melt like wax before the fire, and as water rushing down a declivity.
All these calamities are for the transgression of Jacob, and for the sin of the house of Israel. What is the transgression of Jacob? is it not Samaria? and what is the sin of the house of Juda? is it not Jerusalem?
Therefore I will make Samaria as a store-house of the fruits of the field, and as a planting of a vineyard: and I will utterly demolish her stones, and I will expose her foundations.
And they shall cut in pieces all the graven images, and all that she has hired they shall burn with fire, and I will utterly destroy all her idols: because she has gathered of the hires of fornication, and of the hires of fornication has she amassed wealth.
Therefore shall she lament and wail, she shall go barefooted, and being naked she shall make lamentation as that of serpents, and mourning as of the daughters of sirens.
For her plague has become grievous; for it has come even to Juda; and has reached to the gate of my people, even to Jerusalem.
Ye that are in Geth, exalt not yourselves, and ye Enakim, do not rebuild from the ruins of the house in derision: sprinkle dust in the place of your laughter.
The inhabitant of Sennaar, fairly inhabiting her cities, came not forth to mourn for the house next to her: she shall receive of you the stroke of grief.
Who has begun to act for good to her that dwells in sorrow? for calamities have come down from the Lord upon the gates of Jerusalem,
even a sound of chariots and horsemen: the inhabitants of Lachis, she is the leader of sin to the daughter of Sion: for in thee were found the transgressions of Israel.
Therefore shall he cause men to be sent forth as far as the inheritance of Geth, even vain houses; they are become vanity to the kings of Israel;
until they bring the heirs, O inhabitant of Lachis: the inheritance shall reach to Odollam, even the glory of the daughter of Israel.
Shave thine hair, and make thyself bald for thy delicate children; increase thy widowhood as an eagle; for thy people are gone into captivity from thee.
Thus saith the Lord, My people went down before to Egypt to sojourn there; and were carried away forcibly to the Assyrians.
And now why are ye here? Thus saith the Lord, Because my people was taken for nothing, wonder ye and howl. Thus saith the Lord, On account of you my name is continually blasphemed among the Gentiles.
Therefore shall my people know my name in that day, for I am he that speaks: I am present,
as a season of beauty upon the mountains, as the feet of one preaching glad tidings of peace, as one preaching good news: for I will publish thy salvation, saying, O Sion, thy God shall reign.
For the voice of them that guard thee is exalted, and with the voice together they shall rejoice: for eyes shall look to eyes, when the Lord shall have mercy upon Sion.
Let the waste places of Jerusalem break forth in joy together, because the Lord has had mercy upon her, and has delivered Jerusalem.
And the Lord shall reveal his holy arm in the sight of all the nations; and all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation that comes from our God.
Depart ye, depart, go out from thence, and touch not the unclean thing; go ye out from the midst of her; separate yourselves, ye that bear the vessels of the Lord.
For ye shall not go forth with tumult, neither go by flight: for the Lord shall go first in advance of you; and the God of Israel shall be he that brings up your rear.
Behold, my servant shall understand, and be exalted, and glorified exceedingly.
As many shall be amazed at thee, so shall thy face be without glory from men, and thy glory shall not be honoured by the sons of men.
Thus shall many nations wonder at him; and kings shall keep their mouths shut: for they to whom no report was brought concerning him, shall see; and they who have not heard, shall consider.
Thou shalt proclaim wisdom, that understanding may be obedient to thee.
For she is on lofty eminences, and stands in the midst of the ways.
For she sits by the gates of princes, and sings in the entrances, saying,
You, O men, I exhort; and utter my voice to the sons of men.
O ye simple, understand subtlety, and ye that are untaught, imbibe knowledge.
Hearken to me; for I will speak solemn truths; and will produce right sayings from my lips.
For my throat shall meditate truth; and false lips are an abomination before me.
All the words of my mouth are in righteousness; there is nothing in them wrong or perverse.
They are all evident to those that understand, and right to those that find knowledge.
Receive instruction, and not silver; and knowledge rather than tried gold.
For wisdom is better than precious stones; and no valuable substance is of equal worth with it.
I wisdom have dwelt with counsel and knowledge, and I have called upon understanding.
The fear of the Lord hates unrighteousness, and insolence, and pride, and the ways of wicked men; and I hate the perverse ways of bad men.
Counsel and safety are mine; prudence is mine, and strength is mine.
By me kings reign, and princes decree justice.
By me nobles become great, and monarchs by me rule over the earth.
I love those that love me; and they that seek me shall find me.
Wealth and glory belong to me; yea, abundant possessions and righteousness.
It is better to have my fruit than to have gold and precious stones; and my produce is better than choice silver.
I walk in ways of righteousness, and am conversant with the paths of judgment;
that I may divide substance to them that love me, and may fill their treasures with good things. If I declare to you the things that daily happen, I will remember also to recount the things of old.
The Lord made me the beginning of his ways for his works.
He established me before time was in the beginning, before he made the earth:
even before he made the depths; before the fountains of water came forth:
before the mountains were settled, and before all hills, he begets me.
The Lord made countries and uninhabited tracks, and the highest inhabited parts of the world.
When he prepared the heaven, I was present with him; and when he prepared his throne upon the winds:
and when he strengthened the clouds above; and when he secured the fountains of the earth:
decree. and when he strengthened the foundations of the earth:
I was by him, suiting myself to him, I was that wherein he took delight; and daily I rejoiced in his presence continually.
For he rejoiced when he had completed the world, and rejoiced among the children of men.
Now then, my son, hear me: blessed is the man who shall hearken to me, and the mortal who shall keep my ways;
Hear wisdom and be wise, and be not strangers to it.
watching daily at my doors, waiting at the posts of my entrances.
For my outgoings are the outgoings of life, and in them is prepared favour from the Lord.
But they that sin against me act wickedly against their own souls: and they that hate me love death.
And remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, before the days of evil come, and the years overtake thee in which thou shalt say, I have no pleasure in them.
While the sun and light are not darkened, nor the moon and the stars; nor the clouds return after the rain:
in the day wherein the keepers of the house shall tremble, and the mighty men shall become bent, and the grinding women cease because they have become few, and the women looking out at the windows be dark;
and they shall shut the doors in the market-place, because of the weakness of the voice of her that grinds at the mill; and he shall rise up at the voice of the sparrow, and all the daughters of song shall be brought low;
and they shall look up, and fears shall be in the way, and the almond tree shall blossom, and the locust shall increase, and the caper shall be scattered: because man has gone to his eternal home, and the mourners have gone about the market:
before the silver cord be let go, or the choice gold be broken, or the pitcher be broken at the fountain, or the wheel run down to the cistern;
before the dust also return to the earth as it was, and the spirit return to God who gave it.
Vanity of vanities, said the Preacher; all is vanity.
And because the Preacher was wise above others, so it was that he taught man excellent knowledge, and the ear will trace out the parables.
The Preacher sought diligently to find out acceptable words, and a correct writing, even words of truth.
The words of the wise are as goads, and as nails firmly fastened, which have been given from one shepherd by agreement.
And moreover, my son, guard thyself by means of them: of making many books there is no end; and much study is a weariness of the flesh.
Hear the end of the matter, the sun: Fear God, and keep his commandments: for this is the whole man.
For God will bring every work into judgment, with everything that has been overlooked, whether it be good, or whether it be evil.
And the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron in the land of Egypt, saying,
This month shall be to you the beginning of months: it is the first to you among the months of the year.
Speak to all the congregation of the children of Israel, saying, On the tenth of this month let them take each man a lamb according to the houses of their families, every man a lamb for his household.
And if they be few in a household, so that there are not enough for the lamb, he shall take with himself his neighbour that lives near to him, as to the number of souls, every one according to that which suffices him shall make a reckoning for the lamb.
It shall be to you a lamb unblemished, a male of a year old: ye shall take it of the lambs and the kids.
And it shall be kept by you till the fourteenth of this month, and all the multitude of the congregation of the children of Israel shall kill it toward evening.
And they shall take of the blood, and shall put it on the two door-posts, and on the lintel, in the houses in which soever they shall eat them.
And they shall eat the flesh in this night roast with fire, and they shall eat unleavened bread with bitter herbs.
Ye shall not eat of it raw nor sodden in water, but only roast with fire, the head with the feet and the appurtenances.
Nothing shall be left of it till the morning, and a bone of it ye shall not break; but that which is left of it till the morning ye shall burn with fire.
And thus shall ye eat it: your loins girded, and your sandals on your feet, and your staves in your hands, and ye shall eat it in haste. It is a passover to the Lord.
and I will go throughout the land of Egypt in that night, and will smite every first-born in the land of Egypt both man and beast, and on all the gods of Egypt will I execute vengeance: I am the Lord.
And the blood shall be for a sign to you on the houses in which ye are, and I will see the blood, and will protect you, and there shall not be on you the plague of destruction, when I smite in the land of Egypt.
And this day shall be to you a memorial, and ye shall keep it a feast to the Lord through all your generations; ye shall keep it a feast for a perpetual ordinance.
Seven days ye shall eat unleavened bread, and from the first day ye shall utterly remove leaven from your houses: whoever shall eat leaven, that soul shall be utterly destroyed from Israel, from the first day until the seventh day.
And the first day shall be called holy, and the seventh day shall be a holy convocation to you: ye shall do no servile work on them, only as many things as will necessarily be done by every soul, this only shall be done by you.
And ye shall keep this commandment, for on this day will I bring out your force out of the land of Egypt; and ye shall make this day a perpetual ordinance for you throughout your generations.
Beginning the fourteenth day of the first month, ye shall eat unleavened bread from evening, till the twenty-first day of the month, till evening.
Seven days leaven shall not be found in your houses; whosoever shall eat anything leavened, that soul shall be cut off from the congregation of Israel, both among the occupiers of the land and the original inhabitants.
Ye shall eat nothing leavened, but in every habitation of your ye shall eat unleavened bread.
And Moses called all the elders of the children of Israel, and said to them, Go away and take to yourselves a lamb according to your kindreds, and slay the passover.
And ye shall take a bunch of hyssop, and having dipped it into some of the blood that is by the door, ye shall touch the lintel, and shall put it upon both door-posts, even of the blood which is by the door; but ye shall not go out every one from the door of his house till the morning.
And the Lord shall pass by to smite the Egyptians, and shall see the blood upon the lintel, and upon both the door-posts; and the Lord shall pass by the door, and shall not suffer the destroyer to enter into your houses to smite you.
And keep ye this thing as an ordinance for thyself and for thy children for ever.
And if ye should enter into the land, which the Lord shall give you, as he has spoken, keep this service.
And it shall come to pass, if your sons say to you, What is this service?
that ye shall say to them, This passover is a sacrifice to the Lord, as he defended the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt, when he smote the Egyptians, but delivered our houses.
And the people bowed and worshipped. And the children of Israel departed and did as the Lord commanded Moses and Aaron, so did they.
And it came to pass at midnight that the Lord smote all the first-born in the land of Egypt, from the first-born of Pharao that sat on the throne, to the first-born of the captive-maid in the dungeon, and the first-born of all cattle.
And Pharao rose up by night, and his servants, and all the Egyptians; and there was a great cry in all the land of Egypt, for there was not a house in which there was not one dead.
And Pharao called Moses and Aaron by night, and said to them, Rise and depart from my people, both ye and the children of Israel. Go and serve the Lord your God, even as ye say.
And take with you your sheep, and your oxen: bless me also, I pray you.
And the Egyptians constrained the people, so that they cast them out of the land with haste, for they said, We all shall die.
And the people took their dough before their meal was leavened, bound up as it was in their garments, on their shoulders.
And the children of Israel did as Moses commanded them, and they asked of the Egyptians articles of silver and gold and apparel.
And the Lord gave his people favour in the sight of the Egyptians, and they lent to them; and they spoiled the Egyptians.
And the children Israel departed from Ramesses to Socchoth, to the full number of six hundred thousand footmen, even men, besides the baggage.
And a great mixed company went up with them, and sheep and oxen and very much cattle.
And they baked the dough which they brought out of Egypt, unleavened cakes, for it had not been leavened; for the Egyptians cast them out, and they could not remain, neither did they prepare provision for themselves for the journey.
And the sojourning of the children of Israel, while they sojourned in the land of Egypt and the land of Chanaan, was four hundred and thirty years.
And it came to pass after the four hundred and thirty years, all the forces of the Lord came forth out of the land of Egypt by night.
It is a watch kept to the Lord, so that he should bring them out of the land of Egypt; that very night is a watch kept to the Lord, so that it should be to all the children of Israel to their generations.
And the Lord said to Moses and Aaron, This is the law of the passover: no stranger shall eat of it.
And every slave or servant bought with moneyhim thou shalt circumcise, and then shall he eat of it.
A sojourner or hireling shall not eat of it.
In one house shall it be eaten, and ye shall not carry of the flesh out from the house; and a bone of it ye shall not break.
All the congregation of the children of Israel shall keep it.
And if any proselyte shall come to you to keep the passover to the Lord, thou shalt circumcise every male of him, and then shall he approach to sacrifice it, and he shall be even as the original inhabitant of the land; no uncircumcised person shall eat of it.
There shall be one law to the native, and to the proselyte coming among you.
And the children of Israel did as the Lord commanded Moses and Aaron for them, so they did.
And it came to pass in that day that the Lord brought out the children of Israel from the land of Egypt with their forces.
Judge thou, O Lord, them that injure me, fight against them that fight against me.
Take hold of shield and buckler, and arise for my help.
Bring forth a sword, and stop the way against them that persecute me: say to my soul, I am thy salvation.
Let them that seek my soul be ashamed and confounded: let them that devise evils against me be turned back and put to shame.
Let them be as dust before the wind, and an angel of the Lord afflicting them.
Let their way be dark and slippery, and an angel of the Lord persecuting them.
For without cause they have hid for me their destructive snare: without a cause they have reproached my soul.
Let a snare which they know not come upon them; and the gin which they hid take them; and let them fall into the very same snare.
But my soul shall exult in the Lord: it shall delight in his salvation.
All my bones shall say, O Lord, who is like to thee? delivering the poor out of the hand of them that are stronger than he, yea, the poor and needy one from them that spoil him.
Unjust witnesses arose, and asked me of things I new not.
They rewarded me evil for good, and bereavement to my soul.
But I, when they troubled me, put on sackcloth, and humbled my soul with fasting: and my prayer shall return to my own bosom.
I behaved agreeably towards them as if it had been our neighbour or brother: I humbled myself as one mourning and sad of countenance.
Yet they rejoiced against me, and plagues were plentifully brought against me, and I knew it not: they were scattered, but repented not.
They tempted me, they sneered at me most contemptuously, they gnashed their teeth upon me.
O Lord, when wilt thou look upon me? Deliver my soul from their mischief, mine only-begotten one from the lions.
I will give thanks to thee even in a great congregation: in an abundant people I will praise thee.
Let not them that are mine enemies without a cause rejoice against me; who hate me for nothing, and wink with their eyes.
For to me they spoke peaceably, but imagined deceits in their anger.
And they opened wide their mouth upon me; they said Aha, aha, our eyes have seen it.
Thou hast seen it, O Lord: keep not silence: O Lord, withdraw not thyself from me.
Awake, O Lord, and attend to my judgment, even to my cause, my God and my Lord.
Judge me, O Lord, according to thy righteousness, O Lord my God; and let them not rejoice against me.
Let them not say in their hearts, Aha, aha, it is pleasing to our soul: neither let them say, We have devoured him.
Let them be confounded and ashamed together that rejoice at my afflictions: let them be clothed with shame and confusion that speak great swelling words against me.
Let them that rejoice in my righteousness exult and be glad: and let them say continually, The Lord be magnified, who desire the peace of his servant.
And my tongue shall meditate on thy righteousness, and on thy praise all the day.
And the Philistines fought with Israel: and the men of Israel fled from before the Philistines, and they fall down wounded in the mountain in Gelbue.
And the Philistines press closely on Saul and his sons, and the Philistines smite Jonathan, and Aminadab, and Melchisa son of Saul.
And the battle prevails against Saul, and the shooters with arrows, even the archers find him, and he was wounded under the ribs.
And Saul said to his armour-bearer, Draw thy sword and pierce me through with it; lest these uncircumcised come and pierce me through, and mock me. But his armour-bearer would not, for he feared greatly: so Saul took his sword and fell upon it.
And his armour-bearer saw that Saul was dead, and he fell also himself upon his sword, and died with him.
So Saul died, and his three sons, and his armour-bearer, in that day together.
And the men of Israel who were on the other side of the valley, and those beyond Jordan, saw that the men of Israel fled, and that Saul and his sons were dead; and they leave their cities and flee: and the Philistines come and dwell in them.
And it came to pass on the morrow that the Philistines come to strip the dead, and they find Saul and his three sons fallen on the mountains of Gelbue.
And they turned him, and stripped off his armour, and sent it into the land of the Philistines, sending round glad tidings to their idols and to the people.
And they set up his armour at the temple of Astarte, and they fastened his body on the wall of Baethsam.
And the inhabitants of Jabis Galaad hear what the Philistines did to Saul.
And they rose up, even every man of might, and marched all night, and took the body of Saul and the body of Jonathan his son from the wall of Baethsam; and they bring them to Jabis, and burn them there.
And they take their bones, and bury them in the field that is in Jabis, and fast seven days.
Howbeit hear, Job, my words, and hearken to my speech.
For behold, I have opened my mouth, and my tongue has spoken.
My heart shall be found pure by my words; and the understanding of my lips shall meditate purity.
The Divine Spirit is that which formed me, and the breath of the Almighty that which teaches me.
If thou canst, give me an answer: wait therefore; stand against me, and I will stand against thee.
Thou art formed out of the clay as also I: we have been formed out of the same substance.
My fear shall not terrify thee, neither shall my hand be heavy upon thee.
But thou hast said in mine ears, (I have heard the voice of thy words;) because thou sayest, I am pure, not having sinned;
I am blameless, for I have not transgressed.
Yet he has discovered a charge against me, and he has reckoned me as an adversary.
And he has put my foot in the stocks, and has watched all my ways.
For how sayest thou, I am righteous, yet he has not hearkened to me? for he that is above mortals is eternal.
But thou sayest, Why has he not heard every word of my cause?
For when the Lord speaks once, or a second time,
sending a dream, or in the meditation of the night; (as when a dreadful alarm happens to fall upon men, in slumberings on the bed:)
then opens he the understanding of men: he scares them with such fearful visions:
to turn a man from unrighteousness, and he delivers his body from a fall.
He spares also his soul from death, and suffers him not to fall in war.
And again, he chastens him with sickness on his bed, and the multitude of his bones is benumbed.
And he shall not be able to take any food, though his soul shall desire meat;
until his flesh shall be consumed, and he shall shew his bones bare.
His soul also draws nigh to death, and his life is in Hades.
Though there should be a thousand messengers of death, not one of them shall wound him: if he should purpose in his heart to turn to the Lord, and declare to man his fault, and shew his folly;
he will support him, that he should not perish, and will restore his body as fresh plaster upon a wall; and he will fill his bones with morrow.
And he will make his flesh tender as that of a babe, and he will restore him among men in his full strength.
And he shall pray to the Lord, and his prayer shall be accepted of him; he shall enter with a cheerful countenance, with a full expression of praise: for he will render to men their due.
Even then a man shall blame himself, saying, What kind of things have I done? and he has not punished me according to the full amount of my sins.
And he has delivered my soul from death, that my life may praise him in the light.
Hearken, Job, and hear me: be silent, and I will speak.
But now hear, Jacob my servant; and Israel, whom I have chosen.
Thus saith the Lord God that made thee, and he that formed thee from the womb; Thou shalt yet be helped: fear not, my servant Jacob; and beloved Israel, whom I have chosen.
For I will give water to the thirsty that walk in a dry land: I will put my Spirit upon thy seed, and my blessings upon thy children:
and they shall spring up as grass between brooks, and as willows on the banks of running water.
One shall say, I am God's; and another shall call himself by the name of Jacob; and another shall write with his hand, I am God's, and shall call himself by the name of Israel.
Thus saith God the King of Israel, and the God of hosts that delivered him; I am the first, and I am hereafter: beside me there is no God.
Who is like me? let him stand, and call, and declare, and prepare for me from the time that I made man for ever; and let them tell you the things that are coming before they arrive.
Hide not yourselves, nor go astray: have ye not heard from the beginning, and have not I told you? ye are witnesses if there is a God beside me.
But they that framed false gods did not then hearken; and they that graved images are all vain, performing their own desires, which shall not profit them, but they shall be ashamed
that form a god, and all that grave worthless things:
and all by whom they were made are withered: yea, let all the deaf be gathered from among men, and let them stand together; and let them be ashamed and confounded together:
For the artificer sharpens the iron; he fashions the idol with an axe, and fixes it with an awl, and fashions it with the strength of his arm: and he will be hungry and weak, and will drink no water.
The artificer having chosen a piece of wood, marks it out with a rule, and fits it with glue, and makes it as the form of a man, and as the beauty of a man, to set it up in the house.
He cuts wood out of the forest, which the Lord planted, even a pine tree, and the rain made it grow,
that it might be for men to burn: and having taken part of it he warms himself; yea, they burn part of it, and bake loaves thereon; and of the rest they make for themselves gods, and they worship them.
Half thereof he burns in the fire, and with half of it he bakes loaves on the coals; and having roasted flesh on it he eats, and is satisfied, and having warmed himself he says, I am comfortable, for I have warmed myself, and have seen the fire.
And the rest he makes a graven god, and worships, and prays, saying, Deliver me; for thou art my God.
They have no understanding to perceive; for they have been blinded so that they should not see with their eyes, nor perceive with their heart.
And one has not considered in his mind, nor known in his understanding, that he has burnt up half of it in the fire, and baked loaves on the coals thereof and has roasted and eaten flesh, and of the rest of it he has made an abomination, and they worship it.
Know thou that their heart is ashes, and they err, and no one is able to deliver his soul: see, ye will not say, There is a lie in my right hand.
Remember these things, O Jacob and Israel; for thou art my servant; I have formed thee to be my servant: and do thou, Israel, not forget me.
For behold, I have blotted out as a cloud thy transgressions, and thy sin as darkness: turn to me, and I will redeem thee.
Rejoice, ye heavens; for God has had mercy upon Israel: sound the trumpet, ye foundations of the earth: ye mountains, shout with joy, ye hills, and all the trees therein: for God has redeemed Jacob, and Israel shall be glorified.
Thus saith the Lord that redeems thee, and who formed thee from the womb, I am the Lord that performs all things: I stretched out the heaven alone, and established the earth.
Who else will frustrate the tokens of those that have divining spirits, and prophecies from the heart of man? turning the wise back, and making their counsel foolishness;
and confirming the word of his servant, and verifying the counsel of his messengers: who says to Jerusalem, Thou shalt be inhabited; and to the cities of Idumea, Ye shall be built, and her desert places shall spring forth.
Who says to the deep, Thou shalt be dried up, and I will dry up the rivers.
Who bids Cyrus be wise, and he shall perform all my will: who says to Jerusalem, Thou shalt be built, and I will lay the foundation of my holy house.
And Pharao spoke to Joseph, saying, Thy father, and thy brethren, are come to thee.
Behold, the land of Egypt is before thee; settle thy father and thy brethren in the best land.
And Joseph brought in Jacob his father, and set him before Pharao; and Jacob blessed Pharao.
And Joseph settled his father and his brethren, and gave them a possession in the land of Egypt, in the best land, in the land of Ramesses, as Pharao commanded.
And Joseph gave provision to his father, and his brethren, and to all the house of his father, corn for each person.
except only the land of the priests; Joseph bought not this, for Pharao gave a portion in the way of gift to the priests; and they ate their portion which Pharao gave them; therefore they sold not their land.
And Joseph said to all the Egyptians, Behold, I have bought you and your land this day for Pharao; take seed for you, and sow the land.
And there shall be the fruits of it; and ye shall give the fifth part to Pharao, and the four parts shall be for yourselves, for seed for the earth, and for food for you, and all that are in your houses.
And Joseph appointed it to them for an ordinance until this day; to reserve a fifth part for Pharao, on the land of Egypt, except only the land of the priests, that was not Pharao's.
And Israel dwelt in Egypt, in the land of Gesem, and they gained an inheritance upon it; and they increased and multiplied very greatly.
And Jacob survived seventeen years in the land of Egypt; and Jacob's days of the years of his life were a hundred and forty-seven years.
In their affliction they will seek me early, saying, Let us go, and return to the Lord our God; for he has torn, and will heal us;
he will smite, and bind us up.
After two days he will heal us: in the third day we shall arise, and live before him, and shall know him:
Therefore have I mown down your prophets; I have slain them with the word of my mouth: and my judgment shall go forth as the light.
For I will have mercy rather than sacrifice, and the knowledge of God rather than whole-burnt-offerings.
But they are as a man transgressing a covenant:
there the city Galaad despised me, working vanity, troubling water.
And thy strength is that of a robber: the priests have hid the way, they have murdered the people of Sicima; for they have wrought iniquity in the house of Israel.
And Jebosthe the son of Saul heard that Abenner the son of Ner had died in Chebron; and his hands were paralyzed, and all the men of Israel grew faint.
And Jebosthe the son of Saul had two men that were captains of bands: the name of the one was Baana, and the name of the other Rechab, sons of Remmon the Berothite of the children of Benjamin; for Beroth was reckoned to the children of Benjamin.
And the Berothites ran away to Gethaim, and were sojourners there until this day.
And Jonathan Saul's son had a son lame of his feet, five years old, and he was in the way when the news of Saul and Jonathan his son came from Jezrael, and his nurse took him up, and fled; and it came to pass as he hasted and retreated, that he fell, and was lamed. And his name was Memphibosthe.
And Rechab and Baana the sons of Remmon the Berothite went, and they came in the heat of the day into the house of Jebosthe; and he was sleeping on a bed at noon.
And, behold, the porter of the house winnowed wheat, and he slumbered and slept: and the brothers Rechab and Baana went privily into the house:
And Jebosthe was sleeping on his bed in his chamber: and they smite him, and slay him, and take off his head: and they took his head, and went all the night by the western road.
And they brought the head of Jebosthe to David to Chebron, and they said to the king, Behold the head of Jebosthe the son of Saul thy enemy, who sought thy life; and the Lord has executed for my lord the king vengeance on his enemies, as it is this day: even on Saul thy enemy, and on his seed.
And David answered and Rechab and Baana his brother, the sons of Remmon the Berothite, and said to them, As the Lord lives, who has redeemed my soul out of all affliction;
he that reported to me that Saul was dead, even he was as one bringing glad tidings before me: but I seized him and slew him in Sekelac, to whom I ought, as he thought, to have given a reward for his tidings.
And now evil men have slain a righteous men in his house on his bed: now then I will require his blood of your hand, and I will destroy you from off the earth.
And David commanded his young men, and they slay them, and cut off their hands and their feet; and they hung them up at the fountain in Chebron: and they buried the head of Jebosthe in the tomb of Abenezer the son of Ner.
Who will give water to my head, and a fountain of tears to my eyes? then would I weep for this my people day and night, even for the slain of the daughter of my people.
Who would give me a most distant lodge in the wilderness, that I might leave my people, and depart from them? for they all commit adultery, an assembly of treacherous men.
And they have bent their tongue like a bow: falsehood and not faithfulness has prevailed upon the earth; for they have gone on from evil to evil, and have not known me, saith the Lord.
Beware ye each of his neighbour, and trust ye not in your brethren: for every one will surely supplant, and every friend will walk craftily.
Every one will mock his friend; they will not speak truth: their tongue has learned to speak falsehoods; they have committed iniquity, they ceased not, so as to return.
Therefore thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will try them with fire, and prove them; for I will do thus because of the wickedness of the daughter of my people.
Their tongue is a wounding arrow; the words of their mouth are deceitful: one speaks peaceably to his neighbour, but in himself retains enmity.
Shall I not visit for these things? saith the Lord: and shall not my soul be avenged on such a people as this?
Take up a lamentation for the mountains, and a mournful dirge for the paths of the wilderness, for they are desolate for want of men; they heard not the sound of life from the birds of the sky, nor the cattle: they were amazed, they are gone.
And I will remove the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and make it a dwelling-place of dragons; and I will utterly waste the cities of Juda, so that they shall not be inhabited.
Thus saith the Lord, Call ye the mourning women, and let them come; and send to the wise women, and let them utter their voice;
For death has come up through your windows, it has entered into our land, to destroy the infants without, and the young men from the streets.
Thus saith the Lord, Let not the wise man boast in his wisdom, and let not the strong man boast in his strength, and let not the rich man boast in his wealth;
but let him that boasts boast in this, the understanding and knowing that I am the Lord that exercise mercy, and judgment, and righteousness, upon the earth; for in these things is my pleasure, saith the Lord.
Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, when I will visit upon all the circumcised their uncircumcision;
on Egypt, and on Idumea, and on Edom, and on the children of Ammon, and on the children of Moab, and on every one that shaves his face round about, even them that dwell in the wilderness; for all the Gentiles are uncircumcised in flesh, and all the house of Israel are uncircumcised in their hearts.
Hear my prayer, O God, when I make my petition to thee; deliver my soul from fear of the enemy.
Thou hast sheltered me from the conspiracy of them that do wickedly; from the multitude of them that work iniquity;
who have sharpened their tongues as a sword; they have bent their bow maliciously;
to shoot in secret at the blameless; they will shoot him suddenly, and will not fear.
They have set up for themselves an evil matter, they have given counsel to hide snares; they have said, Who shall see them?
They have searched out iniquity; they have wearied themselves with searching diligently, a man shall approach and the heart is deep,
and God shall be exalted, their wounds were caused by the weapon of the foolish children,
and their tongues have set him at nought, all that saw them were troubled;
and every man was alarmed, and they related the works of God, and understood his deeds.
The righteous shall rejoice in the Lord, and hope on him, and all the upright in heart shall be praised.
Except the Lord build the house, they that build labour in vain: except the Lord keep the city, the watchman watches in vain.
It is vain for you to rise early: ye rise up after resting, ye that eat the bread of grief; while he gives sleep to his beloved.
Behold, the inheritance of the Lord, children, the reward of the fruit of the womb.
As arrows in the hand of a mighty man; so are the children of those who were outcasts.
Blessed is the man who shall satisfy his desire with them: they shall not be ashamed when they shall speak to their enemies in the gates.
THE VISION WHICH ESAIAS SON OF AMOS SAW AGAINST BABYLON.
Lift up a standard on the mountain of the plain, exalt the voice to them, beckon with the hand, open the gates, ye rulers.
I give command, and I bring them: giants are coming to fulfil my wrath, rejoicing at the same time and insulting.
A voice of many nations on the mountains, even like to that of many nations; a voice of kings and nations gathered together: the Lord of hosts has given command to a war-like nation,
to come from a land afar off, from the utmost foundation of heaven; the Lord and his warriors are coming to destroy all the world.
Howl ye, for the day of the Lord is near, and destruction from God shall arrive.
Therefore every hand shall become powerless, and every soul of man shall be dismayed.
The elders shall be troubled, and pangs shall seize them, as of a woman in travail: and they shall mourn one to another, and shall be amazed, and shall change their countenance as a flame.
For behold! the day of the Lord is coming which cannot be escaped, a day of wrath and anger, to make the world desolate, and to destroy sinners out of it.
For the stars of heaven, and Orion, and all the host of heaven, shall not give their light; and it shall be dark at sunrise, and the moon shall not give her light.
And I will command evils for the whole world, and will visit their sins on the ungodly: and I will destroy the pride of transgressors, and will bring low the pride of the haughty.
And they that are left shall be more precious than gold tried in the fire; and a man shall be more precious than the stone that is in Suphir.
For the heaven shall be enraged, and the earth shall be shaken from her foundation, because of the fierce anger of the Lord of hosts, in the day in which his wrath shall come on.
And they that are left shall be as a fleeing fawn, and as a stray sheep, and there shall be none to gather them: so that a man shall turn back to his people, and a man shall flee to his own land.
For whosoever shall be taken shall be overcome; and they that are gathered together shall fall by the sword.
And they shall dash their children before their eyes; and they shall spoil their houses, and shall take their wives.
Behold, I will stir up against you the Medes, who do not regard silver, neither have they need of gold.
They shall break the bows of the young men; and they shall have no mercy on your children; nor shall their eyes spare thy children.
And Babylon, which is called glorious by the king of the Chaldeans, shall be as when God overthrew Sodoma, and Gomorrha.
It shall never be inhabited, neither shall any enter into it for many generations: neither shall the Arabians pass through it; nor shall shepherds at all rest in it.
But wild beasts shall rest there; and the houses shall be filled with howling; and monsters shall rest there, and devils shall dance there, and satyrs shall dwell there; and hedgehogs shall make their nests in their houses. It will come soon, and will not tarry.
My son, envy not bad men, nor desire to be with them.
For their heart meditates falsehoods, and their lips speak mischiefs.
A house is built by wisdom, and is set up by understanding.
By discretion the chambers are filled with all precious and excellent wealth.
A wise man is better than a strong man; and a man who has prudence than a large estate.
War is carried on with generalship, and aid is supplied to the heart of a counsellor.
Wisdom and good understanding are in the gates of the wise: the wise turn not aside from the mouth of the Lord,
but deliberate in council. Death befalls uninstructed men.
The fools also dies in sins; and uncleanness attaches to a pestilent man.
He shall be defiled in the evil day, and in the day of affliction, until he be utterly consumed.
Deliver them that are led away to death, and redeem them that are appointed to be slain; spare not thy help.
But if thou shouldest say, I know not this man; know that the Lord knows the hearts of all; and he that formed breath for all, he knows all things, who renders to every man according to his works.
My son, eat honey, for the honeycomb is good, that thy throat may be sweetened.
Thus shalt thou perceive wisdom in thy soul: for if thou find it, thine end shall be good, and hope shall not fail thee.
Bring not an ungodly man into the dwelling of the righteous: neither be deceived by the feeding of the belly.
For a righteous man will fall seven times, and rise again: but the ungodly shall be without strength in troubles.
If thine enemy should fall, rejoice not over him, neither be elated at his overthrow.
For the Lord will see it, and it will not please him, and he will turn away his wrath from him.
Rejoice not in evil-doers, neither be envious of sinners.
For the evil man shall have no posterity: and the light of the wicked shall be put out.
My son, fear God and the king; and do not disobey either of them.
For they will suddenly punish the ungodly, and who can know the vengeance inflicted by both? [A son that keeps the commandment shall escape destruction; for such an one has fully received it. Let no falsehood be spoken by the king from the tongue; yea, let no falsehood proceed from his tongue. The king's tongue is a sword, and not one of flesh; and whosoever shall be given up to it shall be destroyed: for if his wrath should be provoked, he destroys men with cords, and devours men's bones, and burns them up as a flame, so that they are not even fit to be eaten by the young eagles. My son, reverence my words, and receive them, and repent.]
And this thing I say to you that are wise for you to learn: It is not good to have respect of persons in judgment.
He that says of the ungodly, He is righteous, shall be cursed by peoples, and hateful among the nations.
But they that reprove him shall appear more excellent, and blessing shall come upon them;
and men will kiss lips that answer well.
Prepare thy works for thy going forth, and prepare thyself for the field; and come after me, and thou shalt rebuild thine house.
Be not a false witness against thy fellow citizen, neither exaggerate with thy lips.
Say not, As he has treated me, so will I treat him, and I will avenge myself on him for that wherein he has injured me.
A foolish man is like a farm, and a senseless man is like a vineyard.
If thou let him alone, he will altogether remain barren and covered with weeds; and he becomes destitute, and his stone walls are broken down.
Afterwards I reflected, I looked that I might receive instruction.
The sluggard says, I slumber a little, and I sleep a little, and for a little while I fold my arms across my breast.
But if thou do this, thy poverty will come speedily; and thy want like a swift courier.
The heavens declare the glory of God; and the firmament proclaims the work of his hands.
Day to day utters speech, and night to night proclaims knowledge.
There are no speeches or words, in which their voices are not heard.
Their voice is gone out into all the earth, and their words to the ends of the world.
In the sun he has set his tabernacle; and he comes forth as a bridegroom out of his chamber: he will exult as a giant to run his course.
His going forth is from the extremity of heaven, and his circuit to the other end of heaven: and no one shall be hidden from his heat.
The law of the Lord is perfect, converting souls: the testimony of the Lord is faithful, instructing babes.
The ordinances of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart: the commandment of the Lord is bright, enlightening the eyes.
The fear of the Lord is pure, enduring for ever and ever: the judgments of the Lord are true, and justified altogether.
To be desired more than gold, and much precious stone: sweeter also than honey and the honey-comb.
For thy servant keeps to them: in the keeping of them there is great reward.
Who will understand his transgressions? purge thou me from my secret sins.
And spare thy servant the attack of strangers: if they do not gain the dominion over me, then shall I be blameless, and I shall be clear from great sin.
So shall the sayings of my mouth, and the meditation of my heart, be pleasing continually before thee, O Lord my helper, and my redeemer.
Every seven years thou shalt make a release.
And this is the ordinance of the release: thou shalt remit every private debt which thy neighbour owes thee, and thou shalt not ask payment of it from thy brother; for it has been called a release to the Lord thy God.
Of a stranger thou shalt ask again whatsoever he has of thine, but to thy brother thou shalt remit his debt to thee.
For thus there shall not be a poor person in the midst of thee, for the Lord thy God will surely bless thee in the land which the Lord thy God gives thee by inheritance, that thou shouldest inherit it.
And if ye shall indeed hearken to the voice of the Lord your God, to keep and do all these commandments, as many as I charge thee this day,
(for the Lord thy God has blessed thee in the way of which he spoke to thee,) then thou shalt lend to many nations, but thou shalt not borrow; and thou shalt rule over many nations, but they shall not rule over thee.
And if there shall be in the midst of thee a poor man of thy brethren in one of thy cities in the land, which the Lord thy God gives thee, thou shalt not harden thine heart, neither shalt thou by any means close up thine hand from thy brother who is in want.
Thou shalt surely open thine hands to him, and shalt lend to him as much as he wants according to his need.
Take heed to thyself that there be not a secret thing in thine heart, an iniquity, saying, The seventh year, the year of release, draws nigh; and thine eye shall be evil to thy brother that is in want, and thou shalt not give to him, and he shall cry against thee to the Lord, and there shall be great sin in thee.
Thou shalt surely give to him, and thou shalt lend him as much as he wants, according as he is in need; and thou shalt not grudge in thine heart as thou givest to him, because on this account the Lord thy God will bless thee in all thy works, and in all things on which thou shalt lay thine hand.
For the poor shall not fail off thy land, therefore I charge thee to do this thing, saying, Thou shalt surely open thine hands to thy poor brother, and to him that is distressed upon thy land.
And if thy brother or sister, a Hebrew man or a Hebrew woman, be sold to thee, he shall serve thee six years, and in the seventh year thou shalt send him out free from thee.
And when thou shalt send him out free from thee, thou shalt not send him out empty.
Thou shalt give him provision for the way from thy flock, and from thy corn, and from thy wine; as the Lord thy God has blessed thee, thou shalt give to him.
And thou shalt remember that thou wast a servant in the land of Egypt, and the Lord thy God redeemed thee from thence; therefore I charge thee to do this thing.
And if he should say to thee, I will not go out from thee, because he continues to love thee and thy house, because he is well with thee;
then thou shalt take an awl, and bore his ear through to the door, and he shall be thy servant for ever; and in like manner shalt thou do to thy maid-servant.
It shall not seem hard to thee when they are sent out free from thee, because thy servant has served thee six years according to the annual hire of a hireling; so the Lord thy God shall bless thee in all things whatsoever thou mayest do.
Every first-born that shall be born among thy kine and thy sheep, thou shalt sanctify the males to the Lord thy God; thou shalt not work with thy first-born calf, and thou shalt not shear the first-born of thy sheep.
Thou shalt eat it before the Lord year by year in the place which the Lord thy God shall choose, thou and thy house.
And if there be in it a blemish, if it be lame or blind, an evil blemish, thou shalt not sacrifice it to the Lord thy God.
Thou shalt eat it in thy cities; the unclean in thee and the clean shall eat it in like manner, as the doe or the stag.
Only ye shall not eat the blood; thou shalt pour it out on the earth as water.
THE WORD THAT CAME TO JEREMIAS concerning all the people of Juda in the fourth year of Joakim, son of Josias, king of Juda;
which he spoke to all the people of Juda, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying,
And if he that has sanctified it should redeem his house, he shall add to it the fifth part of the money of the valuation, and it shall be his.
And if a man should hallow to the Lord a part of the field of his possession, then the valuation shall be according to its seed, fifty didrachms of silver for a homer of barley.
And if he should sanctify his field from the year of release, it shall stand according to his valuation.
And if he should sanctify his field in the latter time after the release, the priest shall reckon to him the money for the remaining years, until the next year of release, and it shall be deducted as an equivalent from his full valuation.
And if he that sanctified the field would redeem it, he shall add to its value the fifth part of the money, and it shall be his.
And if he do not redeem the field, but should sell the field to another man, he shall not after redeem it.
But the field shall be holy to the Lord after the release, as separated land; the priest shall have possession of it.
And if he should consecrate to the Lord of a field which he has bought, which is not of the field of his possession,
the priest shall reckon to him the full valuation from the year of release, and he shall pay the valuation in that day as holy to the Lord.
And in the year of release the land shall be restored to the man of whom the other bought it, whose the possession of the land was.
And every valuation shall be by holy weights: the didrachm shall be twenty oboli.
And every first-born which shall be produced among thy cattle shall be the Lord's, and no man shall sanctify it: whether calf or sheep, it is the Lord's.
But if he should redeem an unclean beast, according to its valuation, then he shall add the fifth part to it, and it shall be his; and if he redeem it not, it shall be sold according to its valuation.
And every dedicated thing which a man shall dedicate to the Lord of all that he has, whether man or beast, or of the field of his possession, he shall not sell it, nor redeem it: every devoted thing shall be most holy to the Lord.
And whatever shall be dedicated of men, shall not be ransomed, but shall be surely put to death.
Every tithe of the land, both of the seed of the land, and of the fruit of trees, is the Lord's, holy to the Lord.
And if a man should at all redeem his tithe, he shall add the fifth part to it, and it shall be his.
And we turned and went by the way leading to Basan; and Og the king of Basan came out to meet us, he and all his people, to battle at Edraim.
And the Lord said to me, Fear him not, for I have delivered him, and all his people, and all his land, into thy hands; and thou shalt do to him as thou didst to Seon king of the Amorites who dwelt in Esebon.
And the Lord our God delivered him into our hands, even Og the king of Basan, and all his people; and we smote him until we left none of his seed.
And we mastered all his cities at that time; there was not a city which we took not from them; sixty cities, all the country round about Argob, belonging to king Og in Basan:
all strong cities, lofty walls, gates and bars; besides the very many cities of the Pherezites.
We utterly destroyed them as we dealt with Seon the king of Esebon, so we utterly destroyed every city in order, and the women and the children,
and all the cattle; and we took for a prey to ourselves the spoil of the cities.
And we took at that time the land out of the hands of the two kings of the Amorites, who were beyond Jordan, extending from the brook of Arnon even unto Aermon.
The Phoenicians call Aermon Sanior, but the Amorite has called it Sanir.
All the cities of Misor, and all Galaad, and all Basan as far as Elcha and Edraim, cities of the kingdom of Og in Basan.
For only Og the king of Basan was left of the Raphain: behold, his bed was a bed of iron; behold, it is in the chief city of the children of Ammon; the length of it is nine cubits, and the breadth of it four cubits, according to the cubit of a man.
And we inherited that land at that time from Aroer, which is by the border of the torrent Arnon, and half the mount of Galaad; and I gave his cities to Ruben and to Gad.
And the rest of Galaad, and all Basan the kingdom of Og I gave to the half-tribe of Manasse, and all the country round about Argob, all that Basan; it shall be accounted the land of Raphain.
And Jair the son of Manasse took all the country round about Argob as far as the borders of Gargasi and Machathi: he called them by his name Basan Thavoth Jair until this day.
And to Machir I gave Galaad.
And to Ruben and to Gad I gave the land under Galaad as far as the brook of Arnon, the border between the brook and as far as Jaboc; the brook is the border to the children Amman.
And Araba and Jordan are the boundary of Machanareth, even to the sea of Araba, the salt sea under Asedoth Phasga eastward.
And I charged you at that time, saying, The Lord your God has given you this land by lot; arm yourselves, every one that is powerful, and go before your brethren the children of Israel.
Only your wives and your children and your cattle (I know that ye have much cattle), let them dwell in your cities which I have given you;
until the Lord your God give your brethren rest, as also he has given to you, and they also shall inherit the land, which the Lord our God gives them on the other side of Jordan; then ye shall return, each one to his inheritance which I have given you.
And I commanded Joshua at that time, saying, Your eyes have seen all things, which the Lord our God did to these two kings: so shall the Lord our God do to all the kingdoms against which thou crossest over thither.
Ye shall not be afraid of them, because the Lord our God himself shall fight for you.
And I besought the Lord at that time, saying,
Lord God, thou hast begun to shew to thy servant thy strength, and thy power, and thy mighty hand, and thy high arm: for what God is there in heaven or on the earth, who will do as thou hast done, and according to thy might?
I will therefore go over and see this good land that is beyond Jordan, this good mountain and Antilibanus.
And the Lord because of you did not regard me, and hearkened not to me; and the Lord said to me, Let it suffice thee, speak not of this matter to me any more.
Go up to the top of the quarried rock, and look with thine eyes westward, and northward, and southward, and eastward, and behold it with thine eyes, for thou shalt not go over this Jordan.
And charge Joshua, and strengthen him, and encourage him; for he shall go before the face of this people, and he shall give them the inheritance of all the land which thou hast seen.
And we abode in the valley near the house of Phogor.
Alas for the city of Ariel, which David besieged. Gather ye fruits year by year; eat ye, for ye shall eat with Moab.
For I will grievously afflict Ariel: and her strength and her wealth shall be mine.
And I will compass thee about like David, and will raise a mound about thee, and set up towers round thee.
And thy words shall be brought down to the earth, and thy words shall sink down to the earth, and thy voice shall be as they that speak out of the earth, and thy voice shall be lowered to the ground.
But the wealth of the ungodly shall be as dust from a wheel, and the multitude of them that oppress thee as flying chaff, and it shall be suddenly as a moment,
from the Lord of Hosts: for there shall be a visitation with thunder, and earthquake, and a loud noise, a rushing tempest, and devouring flame of fire.
And the wealth of all the nations together, as many as have fought against Ariel, and all they that war against Jerusalem, and all who are gathered against her, and they that distress her, shall be as one that dreams in sleep by night.
And as men drink and eat in sleep, and when they have arisen, the dream is vain: and as a thirsty man dreams as if he drank, and having arisen is still thirsty, and his soul has desired in vain: so shall be the wealth of all the nations, as many as have fought against the mount Sion.
Faint ye, and be amazed, and be overpowered, not with strong drink nor with wine.
For the Lord has made you to drink a spirit of deep sleep; and he shall close their eyes, and the eyes of their prophets and of their rulers, who see secret things.
And all these things shall be to you as the words of this sealed book, which if they shall give to a learned man, saying, Read this, he shall then say, I cannot read it, for it is sealed.
And this book shall be given into the hands of a man that is unlearned, and one shall say to him, Read this; and he shall say, I am not learned.
And the Lord has said, This people draw nigh to me with their mouth, and they honour me with their lips, but their heart is far from me: but in vain do they worship me, teaching the commandments and doctrines of men.
Therefore behold I will proceed to remove this people, and I will remove them: and I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and will hide the understanding of the prudent.
Woe to them that deepen their counsel, and not by the Lord. Woe to them that take secret counsel, and whose works are in darkness, and they say, Who has seen us? and who shall know us, or what we do?
Shall ye not be counted as clay of the potter? Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, Thou didst not form me? or the work to the maker, Thou hast not made me wisely?
Is it not yet a little while, and Libanus shall be changed as the mountains of Chermel, and Chermel shall be reckoned as a forest?
And in that day the deaf shall hear the words of the book, and they that are in darkness, and they that are in mist: the eyes of the blind shall see,
and the poor shall rejoice with joy because of the Lord, and they that had no hope among men shall be filled with joy.
The lawless man has come to nought, and the proud man has perished, and they that transgress mischievously have been utterly destroyed:
and they that cause men to sin by a word: and men shall make all that reprove in the gates an offence, because they have unjustly turned aside the righteous.
Therefore thus saith the Lord concerning the house of Jacob, whom he set apart from Abraam, Jacob shall not now be ashamed, neither shall he now change countenance.
But when their children shall have seen my works, they shall sanctify my name for my sake, and they sanctify the Holy One of Jacob, and shall fear the God of Israel.
IN THE BEGINNING OF THE REIGN OF KING JOAKIM SON OF JOSIAS THERE CAME THIS WORD FROM THE LORD.
Thus said the Lord; Stand in the court of the Lord's house, and thou shalt declare to all the Jews, and to all that come to worship in the house of the Lord, all the words which I commanded thee to speak to them; abate not one word.
Peradventure they will hear, and turn every one from his evil way: then I will cease from the evils which I purpose to do to them, because of their evil practices.
And thou shalt say, Thus said the Lord; If ye will not hearken to me, to walk in my statutes which I set before you,
to hearken to the words of my servants the prophets, whom I send to you early in the morning; yea, I sent them, but ye hearkened not to me;
then will I make this house as Selo, and I will make this city a curse to all the nations of all the earth.
And the priests, and the false prophets, and all the people heard Jeremias speaking these words in the house of the Lord.
And it came to pass, when Jeremias had ceased speaking all that the Lord had ordered him to speak to all the people, that the priests and the false prophets and all the people took him, saying,
Thou shalt surely die, because thou hast prophesied in the name of the Lord, saying, This house shall be as Selo, and this city shall be made quite destitute of inhabitants. And all the people assembled against Jeremias in the house of the Lord.
And the princes of Juda heard this word, and they went up out of the house of the king to the house of the Lord, and sat in the entrance of the new gate.
Then the priests and the false prophets said to the princes and to all the people, The judgment of death is due to this man; because he has prophesied against this city, as ye have heard with your ears.
Then Jeremias spoke to the princes, and to all the people, saying, The Lord sent me to prophesy against this house and against this city, all the words which ye have heard.
And now amend your ways and your works, and hearken to the voice of the Lord; and the Lord shall cease from the evils which he has pronounced against you.
And behold, I am in your hands; do to me as is expedient, and as it is best for you.
But know for a certainty, that if ye slay me, ye bring innocent blood upon yourselves, and upon this city, and upon them that dwell in it; for in truth the Lord has sent me to you to speak in your ears all these words.
Then the princes and all the people said to the priests and to the false prophets; Judgment of death is not due to this man; for he has spoken to us in the name of the Lord our God.
And there rose up men of the elders of the land, and said to all the assembly of the people,
Michaeas the Morathite lived in the days of Ezekias king of Juda, and said to all the people of Juda, Thus saith the Lord; Sion shall be ploughed as a field, and Jerusalem shall become a desolation, and the mountain of the house shall be a thicket of trees.
Did Ezekias and all Juda in any way slay him? Was it not that they feared the Lord, and they made supplication before the Lord, and the Lord ceased from the evils which he had pronounced against them? whereas we have wrought great evil against our own souls.
And there was another man prophesying in the name of the Lord, Urias the son of Samaeas of Cariathiarim; and he prophesied concerning this land according to all the words of Jeremias.
And king Joakim and all the princes heard all his words, and sought to slay him; and Urias heard it and went into Egypt.
And the king sent men into Egypt;
and they brought him thence, and brought him into the king; and he smote him with the sword, and cast him into the sepulchre of the children of his people.
Nevertheless the hand of Achicam son of Saphan was with Jeremias, to prevent his being delivered into the hands of the people, or being killed.
In three things I was beautified, and stood up beautiful both before God and men: the unity of brethren, the love of neighbours, a man and a wife that agree together.
Three sorts of men my soul hateth, and I am greatly offended at their life: a poor man that is proud, a rich man that is a liar, and an old adulterer that doateth.
If thou hast gathered nothing in thy youth, how canst thou find any thing in thine age?
O how comely a thing is judgment for gray hairs, and for ancient men to know counsel!
O how comely is the wisdom of old men, and understanding and counsel to men of honour.
Much experience is the crown of old men, and the fear of God is their glory.
There be nine things which I have judged in mine heart to be happy, and the tenth I will utter with my tongue: A man that hath joy of his children; and he that liveth to see the fall of his enemy:
Well is him that dwelleth with a wife of understanding, and that hath not slipped with his tongue, and that hath not served a man more unworthy than himself:
Well is him that hath found prudence, and he that speaketh in the ears of them that will hear:
O how great is he that findeth wisdom! yet is there none above him that feareth the Lord.
But the love of the Lord passeth all things for illumination: he that holdeth it, whereto shall he be likened?
Give me any plague, but the plague of the heart: and any wickedness, but the wickedness of a woman:
And any affliction, but the affliction from them that hate me: and any revenge, but the revenge of enemies.
There is no head above the head of a serpent; and there is no wrath above the wrath of an enemy.
I had rather dwell with a lion and a dragon, than to keep house with a wicked woman.
The wickedness of a woman changeth her face, and darkeneth her countenance like sackcloth.
Her husband shall sit among his neighbours; and when he heareth it shall sigh bitterly.
All wickedness is but little to the wickedness of a woman: let the portion of a sinner fall upon her.
As the climbing up a sandy way is to the feet of the aged, so is a wife full of words to a quiet man.
Stumble not at the beauty of a woman, and desire her not for pleasure.
A woman, if she maintain her husband, is full of anger, impudence, and much reproach.
A wicked woman abateth the courage, maketh an heavy countenance and a wounded heart: a woman that will not comfort her husband in distress maketh weak hands and feeble knees.
Of the woman came the beginning of sin, and through her we all die.
Give the water no passage; neither a wicked woman liberty to gad abroad.
If she go not as thou wouldest have her, cut her off from thy flesh, and give her a bill of divorce, and let her go.
O God, thou hast rejected and destroyed us; thou hast been angry, yet hast pitied us.
Thou hast shaken the earth, and troubled it; heal its breaches, for it has been shaken.
Thou hast shewn thy people hard things: thou has made us drink the wine of astonishment.
Thou hast given a token to them that fear thee, that they might flee from the bow. Pause.
That thy beloved ones may be delivered; save with thy right hand, and hear me.
God has spoken in his holiness; I will rejoice, and divide Sicima, and measure out the valley of tents.
Galaad is mine, and Manasse is mine; and Ephraim is the strength of my head;
Judas is my king; Moab is the caldron of my hope; over Idumea will I stretch out my shoe; the Philistines have been subjected to me.
Who will lead me into the fortified city? who will guide me as far a Idumea?
Wilt not thou, O God, who hast cast us off? and wilt not thou, O God, go forth with our forces?
Give us help from trouble: for vain is the deliverance of man.
In God will we do valiantly; and he shall bring to nought them that harass us.
And do thou take to thyself both Aaron thy brother, and his sons, even them of the children of Israel; so that Aaron, and Nadab and Abiud, and Eleazar and Ithamar, sons of Aaron, may minister to me.
And thou shalt make holy apparel for Aaron thy brother, for honour and glory.
And they shall take the gold, and the blue, and the purple, and the scarlet, and the fine linen.
And they shall make the shoulder-piece of fine linen spun, the woven work of the embroiderer.
And I took of your sons for prophets, and of your young men for consecration. Are not these things so, ye sons of Israel? saith the Lord.
But ye gave the consecrated ones wine to drink; and ye commanded the prophets, saying, Prophesy not.
Therefore, behold, I roll under you, as a waggon full of straw is rolled.
And flight shall perish from the runner, and the strong shall not hold fast his strength, and the warrior shall not save his life:
and the archer shall not withstand, and he that is swift of foot shall in no wise escape; and the horseman shall not save his life.
And the strong shall find no confidence in power: the naked shall flee away in that day, saith the Lord.
Then Job answered and said,
I know of a truth that it is so: for how shall a mortal man be just before the Lord?
For if he would enter into judgment with him, God would not hearken to him, so that he should answer to one of his charges of a thousand.
For he is wise in mind, and mighty, and great: who has hardened himself against him and endured?
Who wears out the mountains, and men know it not: who overturns them in anger.
Who shakes the earth under heaven from its foundations, and its pillars totter.
Who commands the sun, and it rises not; and he seals up the stars.
Who alone has stretched out the heavens, and walks on the sea as on firm ground.
Who makes Pleias, and Hesperus, and Arcturus, and the chambers of the south.
Who does great and unsearchable things; glorious also and excellent things, innumerable.
If ever he should go beyond me, I shall not see him: if he should pass by me, neither thus have I known it.
If he would take away, who shall turn him back? or who shall say to him, What hast thou done?
For if he has turned away his anger, the whales under heaven have stooped under him.
Oh then that he would hearken to me, or judge my cause.
And if I should call and he should not hearken, I cannot believe that he has listened to my voice.
Let him not crush me with a dark storm: but he has made by bruises many without cause.
For he suffers me not to take breath, but he has filled me with bitterness.
For indeed he is strong in power: who then shall resist his judgment?
For though I should seem righteous, my mouth will be profane: and though I should seem blameless, I shall be proved perverse.
For even if I have sinned, I know it not in my soul: but my life is taken away.
Wherefore I said, Wrath slays the great and mighty man.
For the worthless die, but the righteous are laughed to scorn.
For they are delivered into the hands of the unrighteous man: he covers the faces of the judges of the earth: but if it be not he, who is it?
But my life is swifter than a post: my days have fled away, and they knew it not.
Or again, is there a trace of their path left by ships? or is there one of the flying eagle as it seeks its prey?
And if I should say, I will forget to speak, I will bow down my face and groan;
I quake in all my limbs, for I know that thou wilt not leave me alone as innocent.
But since I am ungodly, why have I not died?
For if I should wash myself with snow, and purge myself with pure hands,
thou hadst thoroughly plunged me in filth, and my garment had abhorred me.
For thou art not man like me, with whom I could contend, that we might come together to judgment.
Would that he our mediator were present, and a reprover, and one who should hear the cause between both.
Let him remove his rod from me, and let not his fear terrify me:
so shall I not be afraid, but I will speak: for I am not thus conscious of guilt.
Thus saith the Lord, Go and procure for thyself a linen girdle, and put it about thy loins, and let it not be put in water.
And it came to pass after many days, that the Lord said to me, Arise, go to the Euphrates, and take thence the girdle, which I commanded thee to hide there.
So I went to the river Euphrates, and dug, and took the girdle out of the place where I had buried it: and, behold, it was rotten, utterly good for nothing.
And the word of the Lord came to me, saying, Thus saith the Lord,
Thus will I mar the pride of Juda, and the pride of Jerusalem;
even this great pride of the men that will not hearken to my words, and have gone after strange gods, to serve them, and to worship them: and they shall be as this girdle, which can be used for nothing.
For as a girdle cleaves about the loins of a man, so have I caused to cleave to myself the house of Israel, and the whole house of Juda; that they might be to me a famous people, and a praise, and a glory: but they did not hearken to me.
And I will scatter them a man and his brother, and their fathers and their sons together: I will not have compassion, saith the Lord, and I will not spare, neither will I pity to save them from destruction.
Hear ye, and give ear, and be not proud: for the Lord has spoken.
Give glory to the Lord your God, before he cause darkness, and before your feet stumble on the dark mountains, and ye shall wait for light, and behold the shadow of death, and they shall be brought into darkness.
But if ye will not hearken, your soul shall weep in secret because of pride, and your eyes shall pour down tears, because the Lord's flock is sorely bruised.
Say ye to the king and the princes, Humble yourselves, and sit down; for your crown of glory is removed from your head.
The cities toward the south were shut, and there was none to open them: Juda is removed into captivity, they have suffered a complete removal.
Lift up thine eyes, O Jerusalem, and behold them that come from the north; where is the flock that was given thee, the sheep of thy glory?
What wilt thou say when they shall visit thee, for thou didst teach them lessons for rule against thyself; shall not pangs seize thee as a woman in travail?
And if thou shouldest say in thine heart, Wherefore have these things happened to me? Because of the abundance of thine iniquity have thy skirts been discovered, that thine heels might be exposed.
If the Ethiopian shall change his skin, or the leopardess her spots, then shall ye be able to do good, having learnt evil.
So I scattered them as sticks carried by the wind into the wilderness.
Thus is thy lot, and the reward of your disobedience to me, saith the Lord; as thou didst forget me, and trust in lies,
I also will expose thy skirts upon thy face, and thy shame shall be seen;
thine adultery also, and thy neighing, and the looseness of thy fornication: on the hills and in the fields I have seen thine abominations. Woe to thee, O Jerusalem, for thou hast not been purified so as to follow me; how long yet shall it be?
Set thy heart upon thy goods; and say not, I have enough for my life.
Follow not thine own mind and thy strength, to walk in the ways of thy heart:
And say not, Who shall control me for my works? for the Lord will surely revenge thy pride.
Say not, I have sinned, and what harm hath happened unto me? for the Lord is longsuffering, he will in no wise let thee go.
Concerning propitiation, be not without fear to add sin unto sin:
And say not His mercy is great; he will be pacified for the multitude of my sins: for mercy and wrath come from him, and his indignation resteth upon sinners.
Make no tarrying to turn to the Lord, and put not off from day to day: for suddenly shall the wrath of the Lord come forth, and in thy security thou shalt be destroyed, and perish in the day of vengeance.
Set not thine heart upon goods unjustly gotten, for they shall not profit thee in the day of calamity.
Winnow not with every wind, and go not into every way: for so doth the sinner that hath a double tongue.
Be stedfast in thy understanding; and let thy word be the same.
Be swift to hear; and let thy life be sincere; and with patience give answer.
If thou hast understanding, answer thy neighbour; if not, lay thy hand upon thy mouth.
Honour and shame is in talk: and the tongue of man is his fall.
Be not called a whisperer, and lie not in wait with thy tongue: for a foul shame is upon the thief, and an evil condemnation upon the double tongue.
Be not ignorant of any thing in a great matter or a small.
Attend, O Shepherd of Israel, who guidest Joseph like a flock; thou who sittest upon the cherubs, manifest thyself;
before Ephraim and Benjamin and Manasse, stir up thy power, and come to deliver us.
Turn us, O God, and cause thy face to shine; and we shall be delivered.
O Lord God of hosts, how long art thou angry with the prayer of thy servant?
Thou wilt feed us with bread of tears; and wilt cause us to drink tears by measure.
Thou has made us a strife to our neighbours; and our enemies have mocked at us.
Turn us, O Lord God of hosts, and cause thy face to shine; and we shall be saved. Pause.
Thou hast transplanted a vine out of Egypt: thou hast cast out the heathen, and planted it.
Thou madest a way before it, and didst cause its roots to strike, and the land was filled with it.
Its shadow covered the mountains, and its shoots equalled the goodly cedars.
It sent forth its branches to the sea, and its shoots to the river.
Wherefore hast thou broken down its hedge, while all that pass by the way pluck it?
The boar out of the wood has laid it waste, and the wild beast has devoured it.
O God of hosts, turn, we pray thee: look on us from heaven, and behold and visit this vine;
and restore that which thy right hand has planted: and look on the son of man whom thou didst strengthen for thyself.
It is burnt with fire and dug up: they shall perish at the rebuke of thy presence.
Let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand, and upon the son of man whom thou didst strengthen for thyself.
So will we not depart from thee: thou shalt quicken us, and we will call upon thy name.
Turn us, O Lord God of hosts, and make thy face to shine; and we shall be saved.
The Lord reigns, let the earth exult, let many islands rejoice.
Cloud, and darkness are round about him; righteousness and judgment are the establishment of his throne.
Fire shall go before him, and burn up his enemies round about.
His lightnings appeared to the world; the earth saw, and trembled.
The mountains melted like wax at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the Lord of the whole earth.
The heavens have declared his righteousness, and all the people have seen his glory.
Let all that worship graven images be ashamed, who boast of their idols; worship him, all ye his angels.
Sion heard and rejoiced; and the daughters of Judea exulted, because of thy judgments, O Lord.
For thou art Lord most high over all the earth; thou art greatly exalted above all gods.
Ye that love the Lord, hate evil; the Lord preserves the souls of his saints; he shall deliver them from the hand of sinners.
Light is sprung up for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart.
Rejoice in the Lord, ye righteous; and give thanks for a remembrance of his holiness.
He that is fractured or mutilated in his private parts shall not enter into the assembly of the Lord.
One born of a harlot shall not enter into the assembly of the Lord.
The Ammanite and Moabite shall not enter into the assembly of the Lord, even until the tenth generation he shall not enter into the assembly of the Lord, even for ever:
because they met you not with bread and water by the way, when ye went out of Egypt; and because they hired against thee Balaam the son of Beor of Mesopotamia to curse thee.
But the Lord thy God would not hearken to Balaam; and the Lord thy God changed the curses into blessings, because the Lord thy God loved thee.
Thou shalt not speak peaceably or profitably to them all thy days for ever.
Thou shalt not abhor an Edomite, because he is thy brother; thou shalt not abhor an Egyptian, because thou wast a stranger in his land.
If sons be born to them, in the third generation they shall enter into the assembly of the Lord.
And if thou shouldest go forth to engage with thine enemies, then thou shalt keep thee from every wicked thing.
If there should be in thee a man who is not clean by reason of his issue by night, then he shall go forth out of the camp, and he shall not enter into the camp.
And it shall come to pass toward evening he shall wash his body with water, and when the sun has gone down, he shall go into the camp.
And thou shalt have a place outside of the camp, and thou shalt go out thither,
and thou shalt have a trowel on thy girdle; and it shall come to pass when thou wouldest relieve thyself abroad, that thou shalt dig with it, and shalt bring back the earth and cover thy nuisance.
Because the Lord thy God walks in thy camp to deliver thee, and to give up thine enemy before thy face; and thy camp shall be holy, and there shall not appear in thee a disgraceful thing, and so he shall turn away from thee.
Thou shalt not deliver a servant to his master, who coming from his master attaches himself to thee.
He shall dwell with thee, he shall dwell among you where he shall please; thou shalt not afflict him.
There shall not be a harlot of the daughters of Israel, and there shall not be a fornicator of the sons of Israel; there shall not be an idolatress of the daughters of Israel, and there shall not be an initiated person of the sons of Israel.
Thou shalt not bring the hire of a harlot, nor the price of a dog into the house of the Lord thy God, for any vow; because even both are an abomination to the Lord thy God.
Thou shalt not lend to thy brother on usury of silver, or usury of meat, or usury of any thing which thou mayest lend out.
Thou mayest lend on usury to a stranger, but to thy brother thou shalt not lend on usury; that the Lord thy God may bless thee
God may bless thee in all thy works upon the land, into which thou art entering to inherit it.
And if thou wilt vow a vow to the Lord thy God, thou shalt not delay to pay it; for the Lord thy God will surely require it of thee, and otherwise it shall be sin in thee.
Thou shalt observe the words that proceed from between thy lips; and as thou hast vowed a gift to the Lord God, so shalt thou do that which thou hast spoken with thy mouth.
Drink this first. Act quickly, O land of Zabulon, land of Nephthalim, and the rest inhabiting the sea-coast, and the land beyond Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles.
O people walking in darkness, behold a great light: ye that dwell in the region and shadow of death, a light shall shine upon you.
The multitude of the people which thou hast brought down in thy joy, they shall even rejoice before thee as they that rejoice in harvest, and as they that divide the spoil.
Because the yoke that was laid upon them has been taken away, and the rod that was on their neck: for he has broken the rod of the exactors, as in the day of Madiam.
For they shall compensate for every garment that has been acquired by deceit, and all raiment with restitution; and they shall be willing, even if they were burnt with fire.
For a child is born to us, and a son is given to us, whose government is upon his shoulder: and his name is called the Messenger of great counsel: for I will bring peace upon the princes, and health to him.
His government shall be great, and of his peace there is no end: it shall be upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom, to establish it, and to support it with judgment and with righteousness, from henceforth and forever. The seal of the Lord of hosts shall perform this.
The Lord has sent death upon Jacob, and it has come upon Israel.
And all the people of Ephraim, and they that dwelt in Samaria shall know, who say in their pride and lofty heart,
The bricks are fallen down, but come, let us hew stones, and cut down sycamores and cedars, and let us build for ourselves a tower.
And God shall dash down them that rise up against him on mount Sion, and shall scatter his enemies;
even Syria from the rising of the sun, and the Greeks from the setting of the sun, who devour Israel with open mouth. For all this his anger is not turned away, but still his hand is exalted.
But the people turned not until they were smitten, and they sought not the Lord.
So the Lord took away from Israel the head and tail, great and small, in one day:
the old man, and them that respect persons, this is the head; and the prophet teaching unlawful things, he is the tail.
And they that pronounce this people blessed shall mislead them; and they mislead them that they may devour them.
Therefore the Lord shall not take pleasure in their young men, neither shall he have pity on their orphans or on their widows: for they are all transgressors and wicked, and every mouth speaks unjustly. For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is yet exalted.
And iniquity shall burn as fire, and shall be devoured by fire as dry grass: and it shall burn in the thickets of the wood, and shall devour all that is round about the hills.
The whole earth is set on fire because of the fierce anger of the Lord, and the people shall be as men burnt by fire: no man shall pity his brother.
But one shall turn aside to the right hand, for he shall be hungry; and shall eat on the left, and a man shall by no means be satisfied with eating the flesh of his own arm.
For Manasses shall eat the flesh of Ephraim, and Ephraim the flesh of Manasses; for they shall besiege Juda together. For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is yet exalted.
And the Lord said to Moses, Go in to Pharao, and thou shalt say to him, These things says the Lord: send forth my people, that they may serve me.
And if thou wilt not send them forth, behold, I afflict all thy borders with frogs:
and the river shall teem with frogs, and they shall go up and enter into thy houses, and into thy bed-chambers, and upon thy beds, and upon the houses of thy servants, and of thy people and on thy dough, and on thine ovens.
And upon thee, and upon thy servants, and upon thy people, shall the frogs come up.
And the Lord said to Moses, Say to Aaron thy brother, Stretch forth with the hand thy rod over the rivers, and over the canals, and over the pools, and bring up the frogs.
And Aaron stretched forth his hand over the waters of Egypt, and brought up the frogs: and the frog was brought up, and covered the land of Egypt.
And the charmers of the Egyptians also did likewise with their sorceries, and brought up the frogs on the land of Egypt.
And Pharao called Moses and Aaron, and said, Pray for me to the Lord, and let him take away the frogs from me and from my people; and I will send them away, and they shall sacrifice to the Lord.
And Moses said to Pharao, Appoint me a time when I shall pray for thee, and for thy servants, and for thy people, to cause the frogs to disappear from thee, and from thy people, and from your houses, only in the river shall they be left behind.
And he said, On the morrow: he said therefore, As thou has said; that thou mayest know, that there is no other God but the Lord.
And the frogs shall be removed away from thee, and from your houses and from the villages, and from thy servants, and from thy people, only in the river they shall be left.
And Moses and Aaron went forth from Pharao, and Moses cried to the Lord concerning the restriction of the frogs, as Pharao appointed him.
And the Lord did as Moses said, and the frogs died out of the houses, and out of the villages, and out of the fields.
And they gathered them together in heaps, and the land stank.
And when Pharao saw that there was relief, his heart was hardened, and he did not hearken to them, as the Lord spoke.
And the Lord said to Moses, Say to Aaron, Stretch forth thy rod with thy hand and smite the dust of the earth; and there shall be lice both upon man, and upon quadrupeds, and in all the land of Egypt.
So Aaron stretched out his rod with his hand, and smote the dust of the earth; and the lice were on men and on quadrupeds, and in all the dust of the earth there were lice.
And the charmers also did so with their sorceries, to bring forth the louse, and they could not. And the lice were both on the men and on the quadrupeds.
So the charmers said to Pharao, This is the finger of God. But the heart of Pharao was hardened, and he hearkened not to them, as the Lord said.
And the Lord said to Moses, Rise up early in the morning, and stand before Pharao: and behold, he will go forth to the water, and thou shalt say to him, These things says the Lord: Send away my people, that they may serve me in the wilderness.
And if thou wilt not let my people go, behold, I send upon thee, and upon thy servants, and upon thy people, and upon your houses, the dog-fly; and the houses of the Egyptians shall be filled with the dog-fly, even throughout the land upon which they are.
and I will distinguish marvellously in that day the land of Gesem, on which my people dwell, in which the dog-fly shall not be: that thou mayest know that I am the Lord the God of all the earth.
And I will put a difference between my people and thy people, and on the morrow shall this be on the land. And the Lord did thus.
And the dog-fly came in abundance into the houses of Pharao, and into the houses of his servants, and into all the land of Egypt; and the land was destroyed by the dog-fly.
And Pharao called Moses and Aaron, saying, Go and sacrifice to the Lord your God in the land.
And Moses said, It cannot be so, for we shall sacrifice to the Lord our God the abominations of the Egyptians; for if we sacrifice the abominations of the Egyptians before them, we shall be stoned.
We will go a journey of three days into the wilderness, and we will sacrifice to the Lord our God, as the Lord said to us.
And Pharao said, I will let you go, and do ye sacrifice to your God in the wilderness, but do not go very far away: pray then for me to the Lord.
And Sedekias the son of Josias reigned instead of Joakim, whom Nabuchodonosor appointed to reign over Juda.
And he and his servants and the people of the land hearkened not to the words of the Lord, which he spoke by Jeremias.
And king Sedekias sent Joachal son of Selemias and Sophonias the priest son of Maasaeas to Jeremias, saying, Pray now for us to the Lord.
Now Jeremias came and went through the midst of the city: for they had not put him into the house of the prison.
And the host of Pharao was come forth out of Egypt; and the Chaldeans heard the report of them, and they went up from Jerusalem.
Thus said the Lord; Thus shalt thou say to the king of Juda who sent to thee, to seek me; Behold, the army of Pharao which is come forth to help you: they shall return to the land of Egypt:
and the Chaldeans themselves shall turn again, and fight against this city, and take it, and burn it with fire.
For thus saith the Lord; Suppose not in your hearts, saying, The Chaldeans will certainly depart from us: for they shall not depart.
And though ye should smite the whole host of the Chaldeans that fight against you, and there should be left a few wounded men, these should rise up each in his place, and burn this city with fire.
And it came to pass, when the host of the Chaldeans had gone up from Jerusalem for fear of the host of Pharao,
that Jeremias went forth from Jerusalem to go into the land of Benjamin, to buy thence a property in the midst of the people.
And he was in the gate of Benjamin, and there was there a man with whom he lodged, Saruia the son of Selemias, the son of Ananias; and he caught Jeremias, saying, Thou art fleeing to the Chaldeans.
And he said, It is false; I do not flee to the Chaldeans. But he hearkened not to him; and Saruia caught Jeremias, and brought him to the princes.
And the princes were very angry with Jeremias, and smote him, and sent him into the house of Jonathan the scribe: for they had made this a prison.
So Jeremias came into the dungeon, and into the cells, and he remained there many days.
Then Sedekias sent, and called him; and the king asked him secretly, saying, Is there a word from the Lord? and he said, There is: thou shalt be delivered into the hands of the king of Babylon.
And Jeremias said to the king, Wherein have I wronged thee, or thy servants, or this people, that thou puttest me in prison?
And where are your prophets who prophesied to you saying, The king of Babylon shall not come against this land?
Now therefore, my lord the king, let my supplication come before thy face: and why dost thou send me back to the house of Jonathan the scribe? and let me not on any account die there.
Then the king commanded, and they cast him into the prison, and gave him a loaf a day out of the place where they bake, until the bread failed out of the city. So Jeremias continued in the court of the prison.
And Job continued and said in his parable,
Oh that I were as in months past, wherein God preserved me!
As when his lamp shone over my head; when by his light I walked through darkness.
As when I steadfastly pursued my ways, when God took care of my house.
When I was very fruitful, and my children were about me;
when my ways were moistened with butter, and the mountains flowed for me with milk.
When I went forth early in the city, and the seat was placed for me in the streets.
The young men saw me, and hid themselves: and all the old men stood up.
And the great men ceased speaking, and laid their finger on their mouth.
And they that heard me blessed me, and their tongue clave to their throat.
For the ear heard, and blessed me; and the eye saw me, and turned aside.
For I saved the poor out of the hand of the oppressor, and helped the fatherless who had no helper.
Let the blessing of the perishing one come upon me; yea, the mouth of the widow has blessed me.
Also I put on righteousness, and clothed myself with judgment like a mantle.
I was the eye of the blind, and the foot of the lame.
I was the father of the helpless; and I searched out the cause which I knew not.
And I broke the jaw-teeth of the unrighteous; I plucked the spoil out of the midst of their teeth.
And I said, My age shall continue as the stem of a palm-tree; I shall live a long while.
Men heard me, and gave heed, and they were silent at my counsel.
At my word they spoke not again, and they were very gland whenever I spoke to them.
As the thirsty earth expecting the rain, so they waited for my speech.
Were I to laugh on them, they would not believe it; and the light of my face has not failed.
I chose out their way, and sat chief, and dwelt as a king in the midst of warriors, as one comforting mourners.
And the Lord shewed me Jesus the high priest standing before the angel of the Lord, and the Devil stood on his right hand to resist him.
And the Lords said to the Devil,
The Lord rebuke thee, O Devil, even the Lord that has chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee: behold! is not this as a brand plucked from the fire?
Now Jesus was clothed in filthy raiment, and stood before the angel.
And the Lord answered and spoke to those who stood before him, saying, Take away the filthy raiment from him: and he said to him, Behold, I have taken away thine iniquities: and clothe ye him with a long robe,
and place a pure mitre upon his head. So they placed a pure mitre upon his head, and clothed him with garments: and the angel of the Lord stood by.
And the angel of the Lord testified to Jesus, saying,
Thus saith the Lord Almighty; If thou wilt walk in my ways, and take heed to my charges, then shalt thou judge my house: and if thou wilt diligently keep my court, then will I give thee men to walk in the midst of these that stand here.
Hear now, Jesus the high priest, thou, and thy neighbours that are sitting before thee: for they are diviners, for, behold, I bring forth my servant The Branch.
For as for the stone which I have set before the face of Jesus, on the one stone are seven eyes: behold, I am digging a trench, saith the Lord Almighty, and I will search out all the iniquity of that land in one day.
He that loves instruction loves sense, but he that hates reproofs is a fool.
He that has found favour with the Lord is made better; but a transgressor shall be passed over in silence.
A man shall not prosper by wickedness; but the roots of the righteous shall not be taken up.
A virtuous woman is a crown to her husband; but as a worm in wood, so a bad woman destroys her husband.
The thoughts of the righteous are true judgments; but ungodly men devise deceits.
The words of ungodly men are crafty; but the mouth of the upright shall deliver them.
When the ungodly is overthrown, he vanishes away; but the houses of the just remain.
The mouth of an understanding man is praised by a man; but he that is dull of heart is had in derision.
Better is a man in dishonour serving himself, than one honouring himself and wanting bread.
A righteous man has pity for the lives of his cattle; but the bowels of the ungodly are unmerciful.
He that tills his own land shall be satisfied with bread; but they that pursue vanities are void of understanding. He that enjoys himself in banquets of wine, shall leave dishonour in his own strong holds.
The desires of the ungodly are evil; but the roots of the godly are firmly set.
For the sin of his lips a sinner falls into snare; but a righteous man escapes from them. He whose looks are gentle shall be pitied, but he that contends in the gates will afflict souls.
The soul of a man shall be filled with good from the fruits of his mouth; and the recompence of his lips shall be given to him.
The ways of fools are right in their own eyes; but a wise man hearkens to counsels.
A fool declares his wrath the same day; but a prudent man hides his own disgrace.
A righteous man declares the open truth; but an unjust witness is deceitful.
Some wound as they speak, like swords; but the tongues of the wise heal.
True lips establish testimony; but a hasty witness has an unjust tongue.
There is deceit in the heart of him that imagines evil; but they that love peace shall rejoice.
No injustice will please a just man; but the ungodly will be filled with mischief.
Lying lips are a abomination to the Lord; but he that deals faithfully is accepted with him.
An understanding man is a throne of wisdom; but the heart of fools shall meet with curses.
The hand of chosen men shall easily obtain rule; but the deceitful shall be for a prey.
A terrible word troubles the heart of a righteous man; but a good message rejoices him.
A just arbitrator shall be his own friend; but mischief shall pursue sinners; and the way of ungodly men shall lead them astray.
A deceitful man shall catch no game; but a blameless man is a precious possession.
In the ways of righteousness is life; but the ways of those that remember injuries lead to death.
Who knows the wise? and who knows the interpretation of a saying? A man's wisdom will lighten his countenance; but a man of shameless countenance will be hated.
Observe the commandment of the king, and that because of the word of the oath of God.
Be not hasty; thou shalt go forth out of his presence: stand not in an evil matter; for he will do whatsoever he shall please,
even as a king having power: and who will say to him, What doest thou?
He that keeps the commandment shall not know an evil thing: and the heart of the wise knows the time of judgment.
For to every thing there is time and judgment; for the knowledge of a man is great to him.
For there is no one that knows what is going to be: for who shall tell him how it shall be?
There is no man that has power over the spirit to retain the spirit; and there is no power in the day of death: and there is no discharge in the day of the battle; neither shall ungodliness save her votary.
So I saw all this, and I applied my heart to every work that has been done under the sun; all the things wherein man has power over man to afflict him.
And then I saw the ungodly carried into the tombs, and that out of the holy place: and they departed, and were praised in the city, because they had done thus: this also is vanity.
Because there is no contradiction made on the part of those who do evil quickly, therefore the heart of the children of men is fully determined in them to do evil.
He that has sinned has done evil from that time, and long from beforehand: nevertheless I know, that it is well with them that fear God, that they may fear before him:
but it shall not be well with the ungodly, and he shall not prolong his days, which are as a shadow; forasmuch as he fears not before God.
There is a vanity which is done upon the earth; that there are righteous persons to whom it happens according to the doing of the ungodly; and there are ungodly men, to whom it happens according to the doing of the just: I said, This is also vanity.
Then I praised mirth, because there is no good for a man under the sun, but to eat, and drink, and be merry: and this shall attend him in his labour all the days of his life, which God has given him under the sun.
Whereupon I set my heart to know wisdom, and to perceive the trouble that was wrought upon the earth: for there is that neither by day nor night sees sleep with his eyes.
And I beheld all the works of God, that a man shall not be able to discover the work which is wrought under the sun; whatsoever things a man shall endeavour to seek, however a man may labour to seek it, yet he shall not find it; yea, how much soever a wise man may speak of knowing it, he shall not be able to find it: for I applied all this to my heart, and my heart has seen all this.
It was the twenty-first year of Sedekias, when he began to reign, and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Amitaal, the daughter of Jeremias, of Lobena.
And it came to pass in the ninth year of his reign, in the ninth month, on the tenth day of the month, that Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon came, and all his host, against Jerusalem, and they made a rampart round it, and built a wall round about it with large stones.
So the city was besieged, until the eleventh year of king Sedekias,
on the ninth day of the month, and then the famine was severe in the city, and there was no bread for the people of the land.
And the city was broken up, and all the men of war went out by night by the way of the gate, between the wall and the outworks, which were by the king's garden; and the Chaldeans were by the city round about; and they went by the way leading to the wilderness.
But the host of the Chaldeans pursued after the king, and overtook him in the country beyond Jericho; and all his servants were dispersed from about him.
And they took the king, and brought him to the king of Babylon to Deblatha, and he judged him.
And the king of Babylon slew the sons of Sedekias before his eyes; and he slew all the princes of Juda in Deblatha.
And he put out the eyes of Sedekias, and bound him in fetters; and the king of Babylon brought him to Babylon, and put him into the grinding-house, until the day when he died.
And in the fifth month, on the tenth day of the month, Nabuzardan the captain of the guard, who waited on the king of Babylon, came to Jerusalem;
and he burnt the house of the Lord, and the king's house; and all the houses of the city, and every great house he burnt with fire.
And the host of the Chaldeans that was with the captain of the guard pulled down all the wall of Jerusalem round about.
But the captain of the guard left the remnant of the people to be vinedressers and husbandmen.
And the Chaldeans broke in pieces the brazen pillars that were in the house of the Lord, and the bases, and the brazen sea that was in the house of the Lord, and they took the brass thereof, and carried it away to Babylon.
Also the rim, and the bowls, and the flesh-hooks, and all the brazen vessels, wherewith they ministered;
and the basons, and the snuffers, and the oil-funnels, and the candlesticks, and the censers, and the cups, the golden, of gold, and the silver, of silver, the captain of the guard took away.
And the two pillars, and the one sea, and the twelve brazen oxen under the sea, which things king Solomon made for the house of the Lord; the brass of which articles was without weight.
And as for the pillars, the height of one pillar was thirty-five cubits; and a line of twelve cubits compassed it round; and the thickness of it all round was four fingers.
And there was a brazen chapiter upon them, and the length was five cubits, even the height of one chapiter; and there were on the chapiter round about network and pomegranates, all of brass: and correspondingly the second pillar had eight pomegranates to a cubit for the twelve cubits.
And the pomegranates were ninety-six on a side; and all the pomegranates on the network round about were a hundred.
And the captain of the guard took the chief priest, and the second priest, and those that kept the way;
and one eunuch, who was over the men of war, and seven men of renown, who were in the king's presence that were found in the city; and the scribe of the forces, who did the part of a scribe to the people of the land; and sixty men of the people of the land, who were found in the midst of the city.
And Nabuzardan the captain of the king's guard took them, and brought them to the king of Babylon to Deblatha.
And the king of Babylon smote them in Deblatha, in the land of Aemath.
And it came to pass in the thirty-seventh year after that Joakim king of Juda had been carried away captive, in the twelfth month, on the four and twentieth day of the month, that Ulaemadachar king of Babylon, in the year in which he began to reign, raised the head of Joakim king of Juda, and shaved him, and brought him out of the house where he was kept,
and spoke kindly to him, and set his throne above the kings that were with him in Babylon,
and changed his prison garments: and he ate bread continually before him all the days that he lived.
And his appointed portion was given him continually by the king of Babylon from day to day, until the day when he died.
I said, I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue: I set a guard on my mouth, while the sinner stood in my presence.
I was dumb, and humbled myself, and kept silence from good words; and my grief was renewed.
My heart grew hot within me, and a fire would kindle in my meditation: I spoke with my tongue,
O Lord, make me to know mine end, and the number of my days, what it is; that I may know what I lack.
Behold, thou hast made my days old; and my existence is as nothing before thee: nay, every man living is altogether vanity. Pause.
Surely man walks in a shadow; nay, he is disquieted in vain: he lays up treasures, and knows not for whom he shall gather them.
And now what is my expectation? is it not the Lord? and my ground of hope is with thee. Pause.
Deliver me from all my transgressions: thou hast made me a reproach to the foolish.
I was dumb, and opened not my mouth; for thou art he that made me.
Remove thy scourges from me: I have fainted by reason of the strength of thine hand.
Thou chastenest man with rebukes for iniquity, and thou makest his life to consume away like a spider's web; nay, every man is disquieted in vain. Pause.
O Lord, hearken to my prayer and my supplication: attend to my tears: be not silent, for I am a sojourner in the land, and a stranger, as all my fathers were.
Spare me, that I may be refreshed, before I depart, and be no more.
Hear these words, ye house of Jacob, who are called by the name of Israel, and have come forth out of Juda, who swear by the name of the Lord God of Israel, making mention of it, but not with truth, nor with righteousness;
maintaining also the name of the holy city, and staying themselves on the God of Israel: the Lord of hosts is his name. The former things I have already declared;
and they that have proceeded out of my mouth, and it became well known; I wrought suddenly, and the events came to pass.
I know that thou art stubborn, and thy neck is an iron sinew, and thy forehead brazen.
And I told thee of old what should be before it came upon thee; I made it known to thee, lest thou shouldest say, My idols have done it for me; and shouldest say, My graven and molten images have commanded me.
Ye have heard all this, but ye have not known: yet I have made known to thee the new things from henceforth, which are coming to pass, and thou saidst not,
Now they come to pass, and not formerly: and thou heardest not of them in former days: say not thou, Yea, I know them.
Thou hast neither known, nor understood, neither from the beginning have I opened thine ears: for I knew that thou wouldest surely deal treacherously, and wouldest be called a transgressor even from the womb.
For mine own sake will I shew thee my wrath, and will bring before thee my glorious acts, that I may not utterly destroy thee.
Behold, I have sold thee, but not for silver; but I have rescued thee from the furnace of affliction.
For mine own sake I will do this for thee, because my name is profaned; and I will not give my glory to another.
Hear me, O Jacob, and Israel whom I call; I am the first, and I endure for ever.
My hand also has founded the earth, and my right hand has fixed the sky: I will call them, and they shall stand together.
And all shall be gathered, and shall hear: who has told them these things? Out of love to thee I have fulfilled thy desire on Babylon, to abolish the seed of the Chaldeans.
I have spoken, I have called, I have brought him, and made his way prosperous.
Draw nigh to me, and hear ye these words; I have not spoken in secret from the beginning: when it took place, there was I, and now the Lord, even the Lord, and his Spirit, hath sent me.
Thus saith the Lord that delivered thee, the Holy One of Israel; I am thy God, I have shewn thee how thou shouldest find the way wherein thou shouldest walk.
And if thou hadst hearkened to my commandments, then would thy peace have been like a river, and thy righteousness as a wave of the sea.
Thy seed also would have been as the sand, and the offspring of thy belly as the dust of the ground: neither now shalt thou by any means be utterly destroyed, neither shall thy name perish before me.
Go forth of Babylon, thou that fleest from the Chaldeans: utter aloud a voice of joy, and let this be made known, proclaim it to the end of the earth; say ye, The Lord hath delivered his servant Jacob.
And if they shall thirst, he shall lead them through the desert; he shall bring forth water to them out of the rock: the rock shall be cloven, and the water shall flow forth, and my people shall drink.
There is no joy, saith the Lord, to the ungodly.
Hear, ye children, the instruction of a father, and attend to know understanding.
For I give you a good gift; forsake ye not my law.
For I also was a son obedient to my father, and loved in the sight of my mother:
who spoke and instructed me, saying, Let our speech be fixed in thine heart, keep our commandments, forget them not:
and do not neglect the speech of my mouth.
And forsake it not, and it shall cleave to thee: love it, and it shall keep thee.
Secure it, and it shall exalt thee: honour it, that it may embrace thee;
that it may give unto thy head a crown of graces, and may cover thee with a crown of delight.
Hear, my son, and receive my words; and the years of thy life shall be increased, that the resources of thy life may be many.
For I teach thee the ways of wisdom; and I cause thee to go in right paths.
For when thou goest, thy steps shall not be straitened; and when thou runnest, thou shalt not be distressed.
Take hold of my instruction; let it not go, but keep it for thyself for thy life.
Go not in the ways of the ungodly, neither covet the ways of transgressors.
In whatever place they shall pitch their camp, go not thither; but turn from them, and pass away.
For they cannot sleep, unless they have done evil: their sleep is taken away, and they rest not.
For these live upon the bread of ungodliness, and are drunken with wine of transgression.
But the ways of the righteous shine like light; they go on and shine, until the day be fully come.
But the ways of the ungodly are dark; they know not how they stumble.
My son, attend to my speech; and apply thine ear to my words:
that thy fountains may not fail thee; keep them in thine heart.
For they are life to those that find them, and health to all their flesh.
Keep thine heart with the utmost care; for out of these are the issues of life.
Remove from thee a froward mouth, and put far away from thee unjust lips.
Let thine eyes look right on, and let thine eyelids assent to just things.
Make straight paths for thy feet, and order thy ways aright.
Turn not aside to the right hand nor to the left, but turn away thy foot from an evil way: for God knows the ways on the right hand, but those on the left are crooked: and he will make thy ways straight, and will guide thy steps in peace.
And thou, son of man, take thee a sword sharper than a barber's razor; thou shalt procure it for thyself, and shalt bring it upon thine head, and upon thy beard: and thou shalt take a pair of scales, and shalt separate the hair.
A fourth part thou shalt burn in the fire in the midst of the city, at the fulfillment of the days of the siege: and thou shalt take a fourth part, and burn it up in the midst of it: and a fourth part thou shalt cut with a sword round about it: and a fourth part thou shalt scatter to the wind; and I will draw out a sword after them.
And thou shalt take thence a few in number, and shalt wrap them in the fold of thy garment.
And thou shalt take of these again, and cast them into the midst of the fire, and burn them up with fire: from thence shall come forth fire; and thou shalt say to the whole house of Israel,
Thus saith the Lord; This is Jerusalem: I have set her and the countries round about her in the midst of the nations.
And thou shalt declare mine ordinances to the lawless one from out of the nations; and my statutes to the sinful one of the countries round about her: because they have rejected mine ordinances, and have not walked in my statutes.
Therefore thus saith the Lord, Because your occasion for sin has been taken from the nations round about you, and ye have not walked in my statutes, nor kept mine ordinances, nay, ye have not even done according to the ordinances of the nations round about you; therefore thus saith the Lord;
Behold, I am against thee, and I will execute judgment in the midst of thee in the sight of the nations.
And I will do in thee things which I have not done, and the like of which I will not do again, for all thine abominations.
Therefore the fathers shall eat their children in the midst of thee, and children shall eat their fathers; and I will execute judgments in thee, and I will scatter all that are left of thee to every wind.
Therefore, as I live, saith the Lord; surely, because thou hast defiled my holy things with all thine abominations, I also will reject thee; mine eye shall not spare, and I will have no mercy.
A fourth part of thee shall be cut off by pestilence, and a fourth part of thee shall be consumed in the midst of thee with famine: and as for another fourth part of thee, I will scatter them to every wind; and a fourth part of thee shall fall by sword round about thee, and I will draw out a sword after them.
And my wrath and mine anger shall be accomplished upon them: and thou shalt know that I the Lord have spoken in my jealousy, when I have accomplished mine anger upon them.
And I will make thee desolate, and thy daughters round about thee, in the sight of every one that passes through.
And thou shalt be mourned over and miserable among the nations round about thee, when I have executed judgments in thee in the vengeance of my wrath. I the Lord have spoken.
And when I have sent against them shafts of famine, then they shall be consumed, and I will break the strength of thy bread.
So I will send forth against thee famine and evil beasts, and I will take vengeance upon thee; and pestilence and blood shall pass through upon thee; and I will bring a sword upon thee round about. I the Lord have spoken.
ALEPH. How has the Lord darkened in his wrath the daughter of Sion! he has cast down the glory of Israel from heaven to earth, and has not remembered his footstool.
BETH. In the day of his wrath the Lord has overwhelmed her as in the sea, and not spared: he has brought down in his fury all the beautiful things of Jacob; he has brought down to the ground the strong-holds of the daughter of Juda; he has profaned her kings and her princes.
GIMEL. He has broken in his fierce anger all the horn of Israel: he has turned back his right hand from the face of the enemy, and has kindled a flame in Jacob as a fire, and it has devoured all things round about.
DALETH. He has bent his bow as an opposing enemy: he has strengthened his right hand as an adversary, and has destroyed all the desirable things of my eyes in the tabernacle of the daughter of Sion: he has poured forth his anger as fire.
HE. The Lord is become as an enemy: he has overwhelmed Israel as in the sea, he has overwhelmed her palaces: he has destroyed her strong-holds, and has multiplied the afflicted and humbled ones to the daughter of Juda.
VAU. And he has scattered his tabernacle as a vine, he has marred his feast: the Lord has forgotten the feast and the sabbath which he appointed in Sion, and in the fury of his wrath has vexed the king, and priest, and prince.
ZAIN. The Lord has rejected his altar, he has cast off his sanctuary, he has broken by the hand of the enemy the wall of her palaces; they have uttered their voice in the house of the Lord as on a feast day.
HETH. And he has turned to destroy the wall of the daughter of Sion: he has stretched out the measuring line, he has not turned back his hand from afflicting her: therefore the bulwark mourned, and the wall was weakened with it.
TETH. Her gates are sunk into the ground: he has destroyed and broken to pieces her bars, and her king and her prince among the Gentiles: there is no law, nay, her prophets have seen no vision from the Lord.
JOD. The elders of the daughter of Sion have sat upon the ground, they have kept silence: they have cast up dust upon their heads; they have girded themselves with sackcloths: they have brought down to the ground the chief virgins in Jerusalem.
CHAPH. Mine eyes have failed with tears, my heart is troubled, my glory is cast down to the ground, for the destruction of the daughter of my people; while the infant and suckling swoon in the streets of the city.
LAMED. They said to their mothers, Where is corn and wine? while they fainted like wounded men in the streets of the city, while their souls were poured out into their mother's bosom.
MEM. What shall I testify to thee, or what shall I compare to thee, O daughter of Jerusalem? who shall save and comfort thee, O virgin daughter of Sion? for the cup of thy destruction is enlarged: who shall heal thee?
NUN. Thy prophets have seen for thee vanities and folly: and they have not discovered thine iniquity, to turn back thy captivity; but they have seen for thee vain burdens, and worthless visions.
SAMECH. All that go by the way have clapped their hands at thee; they have hissed and shaken their head at the daughter of Jerusalem. Is this the city, they say, the crown of joy of all the earth?
AIN. All thine enemies have opened their mouth against thee: they have hissed and gnashed their teeth, and said, We have swallowed her up: moreover this is the day which we looked for; we have found it, we have seen it.
PHE. The Lord has done that which he purposed; he has accomplished his word, even the things which he commanded from the ancient days: he has thrown down, and has not spared: and he has caused the enemy to rejoice over thee, he has exalted the horn of him that afflicted thee.
TSADE. Their heart cried to the Lord, Ye walls of Sion, pour down tears like torrents day and night: give thyself no rest; let not the apple of thine eyes cease.
KOPH. Arise, rejoice in the night at the beginning of thy watch: pour out thy heart as water before the face of the Lord; lift up thy hands to him for the life of thine infants, who faint for hunger at the top of all the streets.
RHECHS. Behold, O Lord, and see for whom thou has gathered thus. Shall the women eat the fruit of their womb? the cook has made a gathering: shall the infants sucking at the breasts be slain? wilt thou slay the priest and prophet in the sanctuary of the Lord?
CHSEN. The child and old man have lain down in the street: my virgins and my young men are gone into captivity: thou hast slain them with the sword and with famine; in the day of thy wrath thou hast mangled them, thou has not spared.
THAU. He has called my sojourners round about to a solemn day, and there was not in the day of the wrath of the Lord any one that escaped or was left; whereas I have strengthened and multiplied all mine enemies.
He that toucheth pitch shall be defiled therewith; and he that hath fellowship with a proud man shall be like unto him.
Burden not thyself above thy power while thou livest; and have no fellowship with one that is mightier and richer than thyself: for how agree the kettle and the earthen pot together? for if the one be smitten against the other, it shall be broken.
The rich man hath done wrong, and yet he threateneth withal: the poor is wronged, and he must intreat also.
If thou be for his profit, he will use thee: but if thou have nothing, he will forsake thee.
If thou have any thing, he will live with thee: yea, he will make thee bare, and will not be sorry for it.
If he have need of thee, he will deceive thee, and smile upon thee, and put thee in hope; he will speak thee fair, and say, What wantest thou?
And he will shame thee by his meats, until he have drawn thee dry twice or thrice, and at the last he will laugh thee to scorn afterward, when he seeth thee, he will forsake thee, and shake his head at thee.
Beware that thou be not deceived and brought down in thy jollity.
If thou be invited of a mighty man, withdraw thyself, and so much the more will he invite thee.
Press thou not upon him, lest thou be put back; stand not far off, lest thou be forgotten.
Affect not to be made equal unto him in talk, and believe not his many words: for with much communication will he tempt thee, and smiling upon thee will get out thy secrets:
But cruelly he will lay up thy words, and will not spare to do thee hurt, and to put thee in prison.
Observe, and take good heed, for thou walkest in peril of thy overthrowing: when thou hearest these things, awake in thy sleep.
Every beast loveth his like, and every man loveth his neighbour.
All flesh consorteth according to kind, and a man will cleave to his like.
What fellowship hath the wolf with the lamb? so the sinner with the godly.
What agreement is there between the hyena and a dog? and what peace between the rich and the poor?
As the wild ass is the lion's prey in the wilderness: so the rich eat up the poor.
As the proud hate humility: so doth the rich abhor the poor.
A rich man beginning to fall is held up of his friends: but a poor man being down is thrust away by his friends.
When a rich man is fallen, he hath many helpers: he speaketh things not to be spoken, and yet men justify him: the poor man slipped, and yet they rebuked him too; he spake wisely, and could have no place.
When a rich man speaketh, every man holdeth his tongue, and, look, what he saith, they extol it to the clouds: but if the poor man speak, they say, What fellow is this? and if he stumble, they will help to overthrow him.
Riches are good unto him that hath no sin, and poverty is evil in the mouth of the ungodly.
The heart of a man changeth his countenance, whether it be for good or evil: and a merry heart maketh a cheerful countenance.
A cheerful countenance is a token of a heart that is in prosperity; and the finding out of parables is a wearisome labour of the mind.
Run ye about in the streets of Jerusalem, and see, and know, and seek in her broad places, if ye can find one, if there is any one that does judgment, and seeks faithfulness; and I will pardon them, saith the Lord.
The Lord lives, they say; do they not therefore swear falsely?
O Lord, thine eyes are upon faithfulness: thou hast scourged them, but they have not grieved; thou hast consumed them; but they would not receive correction: they have made their faces harder than a rock; and they would not return.
Then I said, It may be they are poor; for they are weak, for they know not the way of the Lord, or the judgment of God.
I will go to the rich men, and will speak to them; for they have known the way of the Lord, and the judgment of God: but, behold, with one consent they have broken the yoke, they have burst the bonds.
Therefore has a lion out of the forest smitten them, and a wolf has destroyed them even to their houses, and a leopard has watched against their cities: all that go forth from them shall be hunted: for they have multiplied their ungodliness, they have strengthened themselves in their revoltings.
In what way shall I forgive thee for these things? Thy sons have forsaken me, and sworn by them that are no gods: and I fed them to the full, and they committed adultery, and lodged in harlots' houses.
They became as wanton horses: they neighed each one after his neighbour's wife.
Shall I not visit for these things? saith the Lord: and shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this.
Go up upon her battlements, and break them down; but make not a full end: leave her buttresses: for they are the Lord's.
Therefore thus saith the Lord Almighty, Because ye have spoken this word, behold, I have made my words in thy mouth fire, and this people wood, and it shall devour them.
will ye not be afraid of me? saith the Lord; and will ye not fear before me, who have set the sand for a bound to the sea, as a perpetual ordinance, and it shall not pass it: yea, it shall rage, but not prevail; and its waves shall roar, but not pass over it.
But this people has a disobedient and rebellious heart; and they have turned aside and gone back:
and they have not said in their heart, Let us fear now the Lord our God, who gives us the early and latter rain, according to the season of the fulfillment of the ordinance of harvest, and has preserved it for us.
the prophets utter unrighteous prophecies, and the priests have clapped their hands: and my people has loved to have it thus: and what will ye do for the future.
Rejoice ye in God our helper; shout aloud to the God of Jacob.
Take a psalm, and produce the timbrel, the pleasant psaltery with the harp.
Blow the trumpet at the new moon, in the glorious day of your feast.
For this is an ordinance for Israel, and a statute of the God of Jacob.
He made it to be a testimony in Joseph, when he came forth out of the land of Egypt: he heard a language which he understood not.
He removed his back from burdens: his hands slaved in making the baskets.
Thou didst call upon me in trouble, and I delivered thee; I heard thee in the secret place of the storm: I proved thee at the water of Strife. Pause.
Hear, my people, and I will speak to thee, O Israel; and I will testify to thee: if thou wilt hearken to me;
there shall be no new god in thee; neither shalt thou worship a strange god.
For I am the Lord thy God, that brought thee out of the land of Egypt: open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it.
But my people hearkened not to my voice; and Israel gave no heed to me.
So I let them go after the ways of their own hearts: they will go on in their own ways.
If my people had hearkened to me, if Israel had walked in my ways,
I should have put down their enemies very quickly, and should have laid my hand upon those that afflicted them.
The Lord's enemies should have lied to him: but their time shall be for ever.
And he fed them with the fat of wheat; and satisfied them with honey out of the rock.
And the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying,
Speak ye to the sons of Israel, saying, These are the beasts which ye shall eat of all beasts that are upon the earth.
Every beast parting the hoof and making divisions of two claws, and chewing the cud among beasts, these ye shall eat.
But of these ye shall not eat, of those that chew the cud, and of those that part the hoofs, and divide claws; the camel, because it chews the cud, but does not divide the hoof, this is unclean to you.
And the rabbit, because it chews the cud, but does not divide the hoof, this is unclean to you.
And the hare, because it does not chew the cud, and does not divide the hoof, this is unclean to you.
And the swine, because this animal divides the hoof, and makes claws of the hoof, and it does not chew the cud, is unclean to you.
Ye shall not eat of their flesh, and ye shall not touch their carcases; these are unclean to you.
And these are what ye shall eat of all that are in the waters: all things that have fins and scales in the waters, and in the seas, and in the brooks, these ye shall eat.
And all things which have not fins or scales in the water, or in the seas, and in the brooks, of all which the waters produce, and of every soul living in the water, are an abomination; and they shall be abominations to you.
Ye shall not eat of their flesh, and ye shall abhor their carcases.
And all things that have not fins or scales of those that are in the waters, these are an abomination to you.
And these are the things which ye shall abhor of birds, and they shall not be eaten, they are an abomination: the eagle and the ossifrage, and the sea-eagle.
And the vulture, and the kite, and the like to it;
and the sparrow, and the owl, and the sea-mew, and the like to it:
and every raven, and the birds like it, and the hawk and his like,
and the night-raven and the cormorant and the stork,
and the red-bill, and the pelican, and swan,
and the heron, and the lapwing, and the like to it, and the hoopoe and the bat.
And all winged creatures that creep, which go upon four feet, are abominations to you.
But these ye shall eat of the creeping winged animals, which go upon four feet, which have legs above their feet, to leap with on the earth.
And these of them ye shall eat: the caterpillar and his like, and the attacus and his like, and the cantharus and his like, and the locust and his like.
Every creeping thing from among the birds, which has four feet, is an abomination to you.
And by these ye shall be defiled; every one that touches their carcases shall be unclean till the evening.
And every one that takes of their dead bodies shall wash his garments, and shall be unclean till the evening.
And whichever among the beasts divides the hoof and makes claws, and does not chew the cud, shall be unclean to you; every one that touches their dead bodies shall be unclean till evening.
And every one among all the wild beasts that moves upon its fore feet, which goes on all four, is unclean to you; every one that touches their dead bodies shall be unclean till evening.
And he that takes of their dead bodies shall wash his garments, and shall be unclean till evening: these are unclean to you.
And these are unclean to you of reptiles upon the earth, the weasel, and the mouse, and the lizard,
the ferret, and the chameleon, and the evet, and the newt, and the mole.
These are unclean to you of all the reptiles which are on the earth; every one who touches their carcases shall be unclean till evening.
And on whatsoever one of their dead bodies shall fall it shall be unclean; whatever wooden vessel, or garment, or skin, or sack it may be, every vessel in which work should be done, shall be dipped in water, and shall be unclean till evening; and then it shall be clean.
And every earthen vessel into which one of these things shall fall, whatsoever is inside it, shall be unclean, and it shall be broken.
And all food that is eaten, on which water shall come from such a vessel, shall be unclean; and every beverage which is drunk in any such vessel, shall be unclean.
And every thing on which there shall fall of their dead bodies shall be unclean; ovens and stands for jars shall be broken down: these are unclean, and they shall be unclean to you.
Only if the water be of fountains of water, or a pool, or confluence of water, it shall be clean; but he that touches their carcases shall be unclean.
And if one of their carcases should fall upon any sowing seed which shall be sown, it shall be clean.
But if water be poured on any seed, and one of their dead bodies fall upon it, it is unclean to you.
And if one of the cattle die, which it is lawful for you to eat, he that touches their carcases shall be unclean till evening.
And he that eats of their carcases shall wash his garments, and be unclean till evening; and he that carries any of their carcases shall wash his garments, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean till evening.
And every reptile that creeps on the earth, this shall be an abomination to you; it shall not be eaten.
And every animal that creeps on its belly, and every one that goes on four feet continually, which abounds with feet among all the reptiles creeping upon the earthye shall not eat it, for it is an abomination to you.
And ye shall not defile your souls with any of the reptiles that creep upon the earth, and ye shall not be polluted with them, and ye shall not be unclean by them.
For I am the Lord your God; and ye shall be sanctified, and ye shall be holy, because I the Lord your God am holy; and ye shall not defile your souls with any of the reptiles creeping upon the earth.
For I am the Lord who brought you up out of the land of Egypt to be your God; and ye shall be holy, for I the Lord am holy.
This is the law concerning beasts and birds and every living creature moving in the water, and every living creature creeping on the earth;
to distinguish between the unclean and the clean; and between those that bring forth alive, such as should be eaten, and those that bring forth alive, such as should not be eaten.
And it came to pass after this, that David smote the Philistines, and put them to flight, and David took the tribute from out of the hand of the Philistines.
And David smote Moab, and measured them out with lines, having laid them down on the ground: and there were two lines for slaying, and two lines he kept alive: and Moab became servants to David, yielding tribute.
And David smote Adraazar the son of Raab king of Suba, as he went to extend his power to the river Euphrates.
And David took a thousand of his chariots, and seven thousand horsemen, and twenty thousand footmen: and David houghed all his chariot horses, and he reserved to himself a hundred chariots.
And Syria of Damascus comes to help Adraazar king of Suba, and David smote twenty-two thousand men belonging to the Syrian.
And David placed a garrison in Syria near Damascus, and the Syrians became servants and tributaries to David: and the Lord preserved David whithersoever he went.
And David took the golden bracelets which were on the servants of Adraazar king of Suba, and brought them to Jerusalem. And Susakim king of Egypt took them, when he went up to Jerusalem in the days of Roboam son of Solomon.
And king David took from Metebac, and from the choice cities of Adraazar, very much brass: with that Solomon made the brazen sea, and the pillars, and the lavers, and all the furniture.
And Thou the king of Hemath heard that David had smitten all the host of Adraazar.
And Thou sent Jedduram his son to king David, to ask him of his welfare, and to congratulate him on his fighting against Adraazar and smiting him, for he was an enemy to Adraazar: and in his hands were vessels of silver, and vessels of gold, and vessels of brass.
And these king David consecrated to the Lord, with the silver and with the gold which he consecrated out of all the cities which he conquered,
out of Idumea, and out of Moab, and from the children of Ammon, and from the Philistines, and from Amalec, and from the spoils of Adraazar son of Raab king of Suba.
And David made himself a name: and when he returned he smote Idumea in Gebelem to the number of eighteen thousand.
And he set garrisons in Idumea, even in all Idumea: and all the Idumeans were servants to the king. And the Lord preserved David wherever he went.
And David reigned over all Israel: and David wrought judgment and justice over all his people.
And Joab the son of Saruia was over the host; and Josaphat the son of Achilud was keeper of the records.
And Sadoc the son of Achitob, and Achimelech son of Abiathar, were priests; and Sasa was the scribe,
and Banaeas son of Jodae was councillor, and the Chelethite and the Phelethite, and the sons of David, were princes of the court.
Because of the sins which ye have committed before God, ye shall be led away captives into Babylon by Nabuchodonosor king of the Babylonians.
So when ye be come unto Babylon, ye shall remain there many years, and for a long season, namely, seven generations: and after that I will bring you away peaceably from thence.
Now shall ye see in Babylon gods of silver, and of gold, and of wood, borne upon shoulders, which cause the nations to fear.
Beware therefore that ye in no wise be like to strangers, neither be ye and of them, when ye see the multitude before them and behind them, worshipping them.
But say ye in your hearts, O Lord, we must worship thee.
For mine angel is with you, and I myself caring for your souls.
As for their tongue, it is polished by the workman, and they themselves are gilded and laid over with silver; yet are they but false, and cannot speak.
And taking gold, as it were for a virgin that loveth to go gay, they make crowns for the heads of their gods.
Sometimes also the priests convey from their gods gold and silver, and bestow it upon themselves.
Yea, they will give thereof to the common harlots, and deck them as men with garments, being gods of silver, and gods of gold, and wood.
Yet cannot these gods save themselves from rust and moth, though they be covered with purple raiment.
They wipe their faces because of the dust of the temple, when there is much upon them.
And he that cannot put to death one that offendeth him holdeth a scepter, as though he were a judge of the country.
He hath also in his right hand a dagger and an axe: but cannot deliver himself from war and thieves.
Whereby they are known not to be gods: therefore fear them not.
For like as a vessel that a man useth is nothing worth when it is broken; even so it is with their gods: when they be set up in the temple, their eyes be full of dust through the feet of them that come in.
And as the doors are made sure on every side upon him that offendeth the king, as being committed to suffer death: even so the priests make fast their temples with doors, with locks, and bars, lest their gods be spoiled with robbers.
They light them candles, yea, more than for themselves, whereof they cannot see one.
They are as one of the beams of the temple, yet they say their hearts are gnawed upon by things creeping out of the earth; and when they eat them and their clothes, they feel it not.
Their faces are blacked through the smoke that cometh out of the temple.
Upon their bodies and heads sit bats, swallows, and birds, and the cats also.
By this ye may know that they are no gods: therefore fear them not.
Notwithstanding the gold that is about them to make them beautiful, except they wipe off the rust, they will not shine: for neither when they were molten did they feel it.
The things wherein there is no breath are bought for a most high price.
They are borne upon shoulders, having no feet whereby they declare unto men that they be nothing worth.
They also that serve them are ashamed: for if they fall to the ground at any time, they cannot rise up again of themselves: neither, if one set them upright, can they move of themselves: neither, if they be bowed down, can they make themselves straight: but they set gifts before them as unto dead men.
As for the things that are sacrificed unto them, their priests sell and abuse; in like manner their wives lay up part thereof in salt; but unto the poor and impotent they give nothing of it.
Menstruous women and women in childbed eat their sacrifices: by these things ye may know that they are no gods: fear them not.
For how can they be called gods? because women set meat before the gods of silver, gold, and wood.
And the priests sit in their temples, having their clothes rent, and their heads and beards shaven, and nothing upon their heads.
They roar and cry before their gods, as men do at the feast when one is dead.
The priests also take off their garments, and clothe their wives and children.
Whether it be evil that one doeth unto them, or good, they are not able to recompense it: they can neither set up a king, nor put him down.
In like manner, they can neither give riches nor money: though a man make a vow unto them, and keep it not, they will not require it.
They can save no man from death, neither deliver the weak from the mighty.
They cannot restore a blind man to his sight, nor help any man in his distress.
They can shew no mercy to the widow, nor do good to the fatherless.
Their gods of wood, and which are overlaid with gold and silver, are like the stones that be hewn out of the mountain: they that worship them shall be confounded.
How should a man then think and say that they are gods, when even the Chaldeans themselves dishonour them?
Who if they shall see one dumb that cannot speak, they bring him, and intreat Bel that he may speak, as though he were able to understand.
Yet they cannot understand this themselves, and leave them: for they have no knowledge.
The women also with cords about them, sitting in the ways, burn bran for perfume: but if any of them, drawn by some that passeth by, lie with him, she reproacheth her fellow, that she was not thought as worthy as herself, nor her cord broken.
Whatsoever is done among them is false: how may it then be thought or said that they are gods?
They are made of carpenters and goldsmiths: they can be nothing else than the workmen will have them to be.
And they themselves that made them can never continue long; how should then the things that are made of them be gods?
For they left lies and reproaches to them that come after.
For when there cometh any war or plague upon them, the priests consult with themselves, where they may be hidden with them.
How then cannot men perceive that they be no gods, which can neither save themselves from war, nor from plague?
For seeing they be but of wood, and overlaid with silver and gold, it shall be known hereafter that they are false:
And it shall manifestly appear to all nations and kings that they are no gods, but the works of men's hands, and that there is no work of God in them.
Who then may not know that they are no gods?
For neither can they set up a king in the land, nor give rain unto men.
Neither can they judge their own cause, nor redress a wrong, being unable: for they are as crows between heaven and earth.
Whereupon when fire falleth upon the house of gods of wood, or laid over with gold or silver, their priests will flee away, and escape; but they themselves shall be burned asunder like beams.
Moreover they cannot withstand any king or enemies: how can it then be thought or said that they be gods?
Neither are those gods of wood, and laid over with silver or gold, able to escape either from thieves or robbers.
Whose gold, and silver, and garments wherewith they are clothed, they that are strong take, and go away withal: neither are they able to help themselves.
Therefore it is better to be a king that sheweth his power, or else a profitable vessel in an house, which the owner shall have use of, than such false gods; or to be a door in an house, to keep such things therein, than such false gods. or a pillar of wood in a palace, than such false gods.
For sun, moon, and stars, being bright and sent to do their offices, are obedient.
And when God commandeth the clouds to go over the whole world, they do as they are bidden.
And the fire sent from above to consume hills and woods doeth as it is commanded: but these are like unto them neither in shew nor power.
Wherefore it is neither to be supposed nor said that they are gods, seeing, they are able neither to judge causes, nor to do good unto men.
Knowing therefore that they are no gods, fear them not,
For they can neither curse nor bless kings:
Neither can they shew signs in the heavens among the heathen, nor shine as the sun, nor give light as the moon.
The beasts are better than they: for they can get under a cover and help themselves.
It is then by no means manifest unto us that they are gods: therefore fear them not.
For as a scarecrow in a garden of cucumbers keepeth nothing: so are their gods of wood, and laid over with silver and gold.
And likewise their gods of wood, and laid over with silver and gold, are like to a white thorn in an orchard, that every bird sitteth upon; as also to a dead body, that is east into the dark.
And ye shall know them to be no gods by the bright purple that rotteth upon them: and they themselves afterward shall be eaten, and shall be a reproach in the country.
Better therefore is the just man that hath none idols: for he shall be far from reproach.
If thou wouldest open the heaven, trembling will take hold upon the mountains from thee, and they shall melt,
as wax melts before the fire; and fire shall burn up the enemies, and thy name shall be manifest among the adversaries: at thy presence the nations shall be troubled,
whenever thou shalt work gloriously; trembling from thee shall take hold upon the mountains.
From of old we have not heard, neither have our eyes seen a God beside thee, and thy works which thou wilt perform to them that wait for mercy.
For these blessings shall happen to them that work righteousness, and they shall remember thy ways: behold, thou wast angry and we have sinned; therefore we have erred,
and we are all become as unclean, and all our righteousness as a filthy rag: and we have fallen as leaves because of our iniquities; thus the wind shall carry us away.
And there is none that calls upon thy name, or that remembers to take hold on thee: for thou hast turned thy face away from us, and hast delivered us up because of our sins.
And now, O Lord, thou art our Father, and we are clay, all of us the work of thine hands.
Be not very wroth with us, and remember not our sins for ever; but now look on us, for we are all thy people.
The city of thy holiness has become desolate, Sion has become as a wilderness, Jerusalem a curse.
The house, our sanctuary, and the glory which our fathers blessed, has been burnt with fire: and all our glorious things have gone to ruin.
I was small among my brethren, and youngest in my father's house: I tended my father's sheep.
My hands formed a musical instrument, and my fingers tuned a psaltery.
And who shall tell my Lord? the Lord himself, he himself hears.
He sent forth his angel, and took me from my father's sheep, and he anointed me with the oil of his anointing.
My brothers were handsome and tall; but the Lord did not take pleasure in them.
I went forth to meet the Philistine; and he cursed me by his idols.
But I drew his own sword, and beheaded him, and removed reproach from the children of Israel.
And when the people saw that Moses delayed to come down from the mountain, the people combined against Aaron, and said to him, Arise and make us gods who shall go before us; for this Moses, the man who brought us forth out of the land of Egyptwe do not know what is become of him.
And Aaron says to them, Take off the golden ear-rings which are in the ears of your wives and daughters, and bring them to me.
And all the people took off the golden ear-rings that were in their ears, and brought them to Aaron.
And he received them at their hands, and formed them with a graving tool; and he made them a molten calf, and said, These are thy gods, O Israel, which have brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.
And Aaron having seen it built an altar before it, and Aaron made proclamation saying, To-morrow is a feast of the Lord.
And having risen early on the morrow, he offered whole burnt-offerings, and offered a peace-offering; and the people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play.
And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Go quickly, descend hence, for thy people whom thou broughtest out of the land of Egypt have transgressed;
they have quickly gone out of the way which thou commandedst; they have made for themselves a calf, and worshipped it, and sacrificed to it, and said,
And now let me alone, and I will be very angry with them and consume them, and I will make thee a great nation.
And Moses prayed before the Lord God, and said, Wherefore, O Lord, art thou very angry with thy people, whom thou broughtest out of the land of Egypt with great strength, and with thy high arm?
Take heed lest at any time the Egyptians speak, saying, With evil intent he brought them out to slay them in the mountains, and to consume them from off the earth; cease from thy wrathful anger, and be merciful to the sin of thy people,
remembering Abraam and Isaac and Jacob thy servants, to whom thou hast sworn by thyself, and hast spoken to them, saying, I will greatly multiply your seed as the stars of heaven for multitude, and all this land which thou spokest of to give to them, so that they shall possess it for ever.
And the Lord was prevailed upon to preserve his people.
And Moses turned and went down from the mountain, and the two tables of testimony were in his hands, tables of stone written on both their sides: they were written within and without.
And the tables were the work of God, and the writing the writing of God written on the tables.
And Joshua having heard the voice of the people crying, says to Moses, There is a noise of war in the camp.
And Moses says, It is not the voice of them that begin the battle, nor the voice of them that begin the cry of defeat, but the voice of them that begin the banquet of wine do I hear.
And when he drew nigh to the camp, he sees the calf and the dances; and Moses being very angry cast the two tables out of his hands, and broke them to pieces under the mountain.
And having taken the calf which they made, he consumed it with fire, and ground it very small, and scattered it on the water, and made the children of Israel to drink it.
And Moses said to Aaron, What has this people done to thee, that thou hast brought upon them a great sin?
And Aaron said to Moses, Be not angry, my lord, for thou knowest the impetuosity of this people.
For they say to me, Make us gods, which shall go before us; for as for this man Moses, who brought us out of Egypt, we do not know what is become of him.
And I said to them, If any one has golden ornaments, take them off; and they gave them me, and I cast them into the fire, and there came out this calf.
And when Moses saw that the people was scattered, for Aaron had scattered them so as to be a rejoicing to their enemies,
then stood Moses at the gate of the camp, and said, Who is on the Lord's side? let him come to me. Then all the sons of Levi came to him.
And he says to them, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, Put every one his sword on his thigh, and go through and return from gate to gate through the camp, and slay every one his brother, and every one his neighbour, and every one him that is nearest to him.
And the sons of Levi did as Moses spoke to them, and there fell of the people in that day to the number of three thousand men.
And Moses said to them, Ye have filled your hands this day to the Lord each one on his son or on his brother, so that blessing should be given to you.
And it came to pass after the morrow had begun, that Moses said to the people, Ye have sinned a great sin; and now I will go up to God, that I may make atonement for your sin.
And Moses returned to the Lord and said, I pray, O Lord, this people has sinned a great sin, and they have made for themselves golden gods.
And now if thou wilt forgive their sin, forgive it; and if not, blot me out of thy book, which thou hast written.
And the Lord said to Moses, If any one has sinned against me, I will blot them out of my book.
And now go, descend, and lead this people into the place of which I spoke to thee: behold, my angel shall go before thy face; and in the day when I shall visit I will bring upon them their sin.
And the Lord smote the people for the making the calf, which Aaron made.
O Lord, who shall sojourn in thy tabernacle? and who shall dwell in thy holy mountain?
He that walks blameless, and works righteousness, who speaks truth in his heart.
Who has not spoken craftily with is tongue, neither has done evil to his neighbour, nor taken up a reproach against them that dwelt nearest to him.
In his sight an evil-worker is set at nought, but he honours them that fear the Lord. He swears to his neighbour, and disappoints him not.
He has not lent his money on usury, and has not received bribes against the innocent. He that does these things shall never be moved.
And it came to pass about a month after this, that Naas the Ammanite went up, and encamped against Jabis Galaad: and all the men of Jabis said to Naas the Ammanite, Make a covenant with us, and we will serve thee.
Naas the Ammanite said to them, On these terms will I make a covenant with you, that I should put out all your right eyes, and I will lay a reproach upon Israel.
And the men of Jabis say to him, Allow us seven days, and we will send messengers into all the coasts of Israel: if there should be no one to deliver us, we will come out to you.
And the messengers came to Gabaa to Saul, and they speak the words into the ears of the people; and all the people lifted up their voice, and wept.
And, behold, Saul came after the early morning out of the field: and Saul said, Why does the people week? and they tell him the words of the men of Jabis.
And the Spirit of the Lord came upon Saul when he heard these words, and his anger was greatly kindled against them.
And he took two cows, and cut them in pieces, and sent them into all the coasts of Israel by the hand of messengers, saying, Whoso comes not forth after Saul and after Samuel, so shall they do to his oxen: and a transport from the Lord came upon the people of Israel, and they came out to battle as one man.
And he reviews them at Bezec in Bama, every man of Israel six hundred thousand, and the men of Juda seventy thousand.
And he said to the messengers that came, Thus shall ye say to the men of Jabis, To-morrow ye shall have deliverance when the sun is hot; and the messengers came to the city, and told the men of Jabis, and they rejoiced.
And the men of Jabis said to Naas the Ammanite, To-morrow we will come forth to you, and ye shall do to us what seems good in your sight.
And it came to pass on the morrow, that Saul divided the people into three companies, and they go into the midst of the camp in the morning watch, and they smote the children of Ammon until the day was hot; at it came to pass that those who were left were scattered, and there were not left among them two together.
And the people said to Samuel, Who has said that Saul shall not reign over us? Give up the men, and we will put them to death.
And Saul said, No man shall die this day, for to-day the Lord has wrought deliverance in Israel.
And Samuel spoke to the people, saying, Let us go to Galgala, and there renew the kingdom.
And all the people went to Galgala, and Samuel anointed Saul there to be king before the Lord in Galgala, and there he offered meat-offerings and peace-offerings before the Lord: and Samuel and all Israel rejoiced exceedingly.
Behold, mine eye has seen these things, and mine ear has heard them.
And I know all that ye too know; and I have not less understanding than you.
Nevertheless I will speak to the Lord, and I will reason before him, if he will.
But ye are all bad physicians, and healers of diseases.
But would that ye were silent, and it would be wisdom to you in the end.
But hear ye the reasoning of my mouth, and attend to the judgment of my lips.
Do ye not speak before the Lord, and utter deceit before him?
Or will ye draw back? nay do, ye yourselves be judges.
For it were well if he would thoroughly search you: for though doing all things in your power ye should attach yourselves to him,
he will not reprove you at all the less: but if moreover ye should secretly respect persons,
shall not his whirlpool sweep you round, and terror from him fall upon you?
And your glorying shall prove in the end to you like ashes, and your body like a body of clay.
Be silent, that I may speak, and cease from mine anger,
while I may take my flesh in my teeth, and put my life in my hand.
Though the Mighty One should lay hand upon me, forasmuch as he has begun, verily I will speak, and plead before him.
And this shall turn to me for salvation; for fraud shall have no entrance before him.
Hear, hear ye my words, for I will declare in your hearing.
Behold, I am near my judgment: I know that I shall appear evidently just.
For who is he that shall plead with me, that I should now be silent, and expire?
But grant me two things: then I will not hide myself from thy face.
Withhold thine hand from me: and let not thy fear terrify me.
Then shalt thou call, and I will hearken to thee: or thou shalt speak, and I will give thee an answer.
How many are my sins and my transgressions? teach me what they are.
Wherefore hidest thou thyself from me, and deemest me thine enemy?
Wilt thou be startled at me, as at a leaf shaken by the wind? or wilt thou set thyself against me as against grass borne upon the breeze?
for thou hast written evil things against me, and thou hast compassed me with the sins of my youth.
And thou hast placed my foot in the stocks; and thou hast watched all my works, and hast penetrated my heels.
I am as that which waxes old like a bottle, or like a moth-eaten garment.
And Rachel having perceived that she bore Jacob no children, was jealous of her sister; and said to Jacob, Give me children; and if not, I shall die.
And Jacob was angry with Rachel, and said to her, Am I in the place of God, who has deprived thee of the fruit of the womb?
And Rachel said to Jacob, Behold my handmaid Balla, go in to her, and she shall bear upon my knees, and I also shall have children by her.
And she gave him Balla her maid, for a wife to him; and Jacob went in to her.
And Jacob said, Thou knowest in what things I have served thee, and how many cattle of thine are with me.
For it was little thou hadst before my time, and it is increased to a multitude, and the Lord God has blessed thee since my coming; now then, when shall I set up also my own house?
And Laban said to him, What shall I give thee? and Jacob said to him, Thou shalt not give me anything; if thou wilt do this thing for me, I will again tend thy flocks and keep them.
Let all thy sheep pass by to-day, and separate thence every grey sheep among the rams, and every one that is speckled and spotted among the goats shall be my reward.
And the man became very rich, and he had many cattle, and oxen, and servants, and maid-servants, and camels, and asses.
Put off, O Jerusalem, the garment of mourning and affliction, and put on the comeliness of the glory that cometh from God for ever.
Cast about thee a double garment of the righteousness which cometh from God; and set a diadem on thine head of the glory of the Everlasting.
For God will shew thy brightness unto every country under heaven.
For thy name shall be called of God for ever The peace of righteousness, and The glory of God's worship.
Arise, O Jerusalem, and stand on high, and look about toward the east, and behold thy children gathered from the west unto the east by the word of the Holy One, rejoicing in the remembrance of God.
The ungodly man flees when no one pursues: but the righteous is confident as a lion.
By reason of the sins of ungodly men quarrels arise; but a wise man will quell them.
A bold man oppresses the poor by ungodly deeds. As an impetuous and profitable rain,
so they that forsake the law praise ungodliness; but they that love the law fortify themselves with a wall.
Evil men will not understand judgment: but they that seek the Lord will understand everything.
A poor man walking in truth is better than a rich liar.
A wise son keeps the law: but he that keeps up debauchery dishonours his father.
He that increases his wealth by usuries and unjust gains, gathers it for him that pities the poor.
He that turns away his ear from hearing the law, even he has made his prayer abominable.
He that causes upright men to err in an evil way, himself shall fall into destruction: transgressor also shall pass by prosperity, but shall not enter into it.
A rich man is wise in his own conceit; but an intelligent poor man will condemn him.
By reason of the help of righteous men great glory arises: but in the places of the ungodly men are caught.
He that covers his own ungodliness shall not prosper: but he that blames himself shall be loved.
Blessed is the man who religiously fears always: but the hard of heart shall fall into mischiefs.
A hungry lion and a thirsty wolf is he, who, being poor, rules over a poor nation.
A king in need of revenues is a great oppressor: but he that hates injustice shall live a long time.
He that becomes surety for a man charged with murder shall be an exile, and not in safety. Chasten thy son, and he shall love thee, and give honour to thy soul: he shall not obey a sinful nation.
He that walks justly is assisted: but he that walks in crooked ways shall be entangled therein.
He that tills his own land shall be satisfied with bread: but he that follows idleness shall have plenty of poverty.
A man worthy of credit shall be much blessed: but the wicked shall not be unpunished.
He that reverences not the persons of the just is not good: such a one will sell a man for a morsel of bread.
An envious man makes haste to be rich, and knows not that the merciful man will have the mastery over him.
He that reproves a man's ways shall have more favour than he that flatters with the tongue.
He that casts off father or mother, and thinks he sins not; the same is partaker with an ungodly man.
An unbelieving man judges rashly: but he that trusts in the Lord will act carefully.
He that trusts to a bold heart, such an one is a fool: but he that walks in wisdom shall be safe.
He that gives to the poor shall not be in want: but he that turns away his eye from him shall be in great distress.
In the places of ungodly men the righteous mourn: but in their destruction the righteous shall be multiplied.
Give thanks to the Lord, for he is good; for his mercy endures for ever.
Let them say so who have been redeemed by the Lord, whom he has redeemed from the hand of the enemy;
and gathered them out of the countries, from the east, and west, and north, and south.
They wandered in the wilderness in a dry land; they found no way to a city of habitation.
Hungry and thirsty, their soul fainted in them.
Then they cried to the Lord in their affliction, and he delivered them out of their distresses.
And he guided them into a straight path, that they might go to a city of habitation.
Let them acknowledge to the Lord his mercies, and his wonderful works to the children of men.
For he satisfies the empty soul, and fills the hungry soul with good things,
even them that sit in darkness and the shadow of death, fettered in poverty and iron;
because they rebelled against the words of God, and provoked the counsel of the Most High.
So their heart was brought low with troubles; they were weak, and there was no helper.
Then they cried to the Lord in their affliction, and he saved them out of their distresses.
And he brought them out of darkness and the shadow of death, and broke their bonds asunder.
Let them acknowledge to the Lord his mercies, and his wonders to the children of men.
For he broke to pieces the brazen gates, and crushed the iron bars.
He helped them out of the way of their iniquity; for they were brought low because of their iniquities.
Their soul abhorred all meat; and they drew near to the gates of death.
Then they cried to the Lord in their affliction, and he saved them out of their distresses.
He sent his word, and healed them, and delivered them out of their destructions.
Let them acknowledge to the Lord his mercies, and his wonderful works to the children of men.
And let them offer to him the sacrifice of praise, and proclaim this works with exultation.
They that go down to the sea in ships, doing business in many waters;
these men have seen the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep.
He speaks, and the stormy wind arises, and its waves are lifted up.
They go up to the heavens, and go down to the depths; their soul melts because of troubles.
They are troubled, they stagger as a drunkard, and all their wisdom is swallowed up.
Then they cry to the Lord in their affliction, and he brings them out of their distresses.
And he commands the storm, and it is calmed into a gentle breeze, and its waves are still.
And they are glad, because they are quiet; and he guides them to their desire haven.
Let them acknowledge to the Lord his mercies, and his wonderful works to the children of men.
Let them exalt him in the congregation of the people, and praise him in the seat of the elders.
He turns rivers into a desert, and streams of water into a dry land;
a fruitful land into saltness, for the wickedness of them that dwell in it.
He turns a wilderness into pools of water, and a dry land into streams of water.
And there he causes the hungry to dwell, and they establish for themselves cities of habitation.
And they sow fields, and plant vineyards, and they yield fruit of increase.
And he blesses them, and they multiply exceedingly, and he diminishes not the number of their cattle.
Again they become few, and are brought low, by the pressure of evils and pain.
Contempt is poured upon their princes, and he causes them to wander in a desert and trackless land.
But he helps the poor out of poverty, and makes him families as a flock.
The upright shall see and rejoice; and all iniquity shall stop her mouth.
Who is wise, and will observe these things, and understand the mercies of the Lord?
And when the Lord thy God shall have destroyed the nations, which God gives thee, even the land, and ye shall inherit them, and dwell in their cities, and in their houses,
thou shalt separate for thyself three cities in the midst of thy land, which the Lord thy God gives thee.
Take a survey of thy way, and thou shalt divide the coasts of thy land, which the Lord thy God apportions to thee, into three parts, and there shall be there a refuge for every manslayer.
And this shall be the ordinance of the manslayer, who shall flee thither, and shall live, whosoever shall have smitten his neighbour ignorantly, whereas he hated him not in times past.
And whosoever shall enter with his neighbour into the thicket, to gather wood, if the hand of him that cuts wood with the axe should be violently shaken, and the axe head falling off from the handle should light on his neighbour, and he should die, he shall flee to one of these cities, and live.
Lest the avenger of blood pursue after the slayer, because his heart is hot, and overtake him, if the way be too long, and slay him, though there is to this man no sentence of death, because he hated him not in time past.
Therefore I charge thee, saying, Thou shalt separate for thy self three cities.
And if the Lord shall enlarge thy borders, as he sware to thy fathers, and the Lord shall give to thee all the land which he said he would give to thy fathers;
if thou shalt hearken to do all these commands, which I charge thee this day, to love the Lord thy God, to walk in all his ways continually; thou shalt add for thyself yet three cities to these three.
So innocent blood shall not be spilt in the land, which the Lord thy God gives thee to inherit, and there shall not be in thee one guilty of blood.
But if there should be in thee a man hating his neighbour, and he should lay wait for him, and rise up against him, and smite him, that he die, and he should flee to one of these cities,
then shall the elders of his city send, and take him thence, and they shall deliver him into the hands of the avengers of blood, and he shall die.
Thine eye shall not spare him; so shalt thou purge innocent blood from Israel, and it shall be well with thee.
Thou shalt not move the landmarks of thy neighbour, which thy fathers set in the inheritance, in which thou hast obtained a share in the land, which the Lord thy God gives thee to inherit.
One witness shall not stand to testify against a man for any iniquity, or for any fault, or for any sin which he may commit; by the mouth of two witnesses, or by the mouth of three witnesses, shall every word be established.
And if an unjust witness rise up against a man, alleging iniquity against him;
then shall the two men between whom the controversy is, stand before the Lord, and before the priests, and before the judges, who may be in those days.
And the judges shall make diligent inquiry, and, behold, if and unjust witness has borne unjust testimony; and has stood up against his brother;
then shall ye do to him as he wickedly devised to do against his brother, and thou shalt remove the evil from yourselves.
And the rest shall hear and fear, and do no more according to this evil thing in the midst of you.
Thine eye shall not spare him: thou shalt exact life for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot.
Woe to them that afflict you; but no one makes you miserable: and he that deals perfidiously with you does not deal perfidiously: they that deal perfidiously shall be taken and given up, and as a moth on a garment, so shall they be spoiled.
Lord, have mercy upon us; for we have trusted in thee: the seed of the rebellious is gone to destruction, but our deliverance was in a time of affliction.
By reason of the terrible sound the nations were dismayed for fear of thee, and the heathen were scattered.
And now shall the spoils of your small and great be gathered: as if one should gather locusts, so shall they mock you.
The God who dwells on high is holy: Sion is filled with judgment and righteousness.
They shall be delivered up to the law: our salvation is our treasure: there are wisdom and knowledge and piety toward the Lord; these are the treasures of righteousness.
Behold now, these shall be terrified with fear of you: those whom ye feared shall cry out because of you: messengers shall be sent, bitterly weeping, entreating for peace.
For the ways of these shall be made desolate: the terror of the nations has been made to cease, and the covenant with these is taken away, and ye shall by no means deem them men.
The land mourns; Libanus is ashamed: Saron is become marshes; Galilee shall be laid bare, and Chermel.
Now will I arise, saith the Lord, now will I be glorified; now will I be exalted.
Now shall ye see, now shall ye perceive; the strength of your breath, shall be vain; fire shall devour you.
And the nations shall be burnt up; as a thorn in the field cast out and burnt up.
They that are afar off shall hear what I have done; they that draw nigh shall know my strength.
The sinners in Sion have departed; trembling shall seize the ungodly. Who will tell you that a fire is kindled? Who will tell you of the eternal place?
He that walks in righteousness, speaking rightly, hating transgression and iniquity, and shaking his hands from gifts, stopping his ears that he should not hear the judgment of blood, shutting his eyes that he should not see injustice.
he shall dwell in a high cave of a strong rock: bread shall be given him, and his water shall be sure.
Ye shall see a king with glory: your eyes shall behold a land from afar.
Your soul shall meditate terror. Where are the scribes? where are the counsellors, where is he that numbers them that are growing up,
even the small and great people? with whom he took not counsel, neither did he understand a people of deep speech, so that a despised people should not hear, and there is no understanding to him that hears.
Behold the city of Sion, our refuge: thine eyes shall behold Jerusalem, a rich city, tabernacles which shall not be shaken, neither shall the pins of her tabernacle be moved for ever, neither shall her cords be at all broken:
for the name of the Lord is great to you: ye shall have a place, even rivers and wide and spacious channels: thou shalt not go this way, neither a vessel with oars go thereby.
For my God is great: the Lord our judge shall not pass me by: the Lord is our prince, the Lord is our king; the Lord, he shall save us.
Thy cords are broken, for they had no strength: thy meat has given way, it shall not spread the sails, it shall not bear a signal, until it be given up for plunder; therefore shall many lame men take spoil.
And the people dwelling among them shall by no means say, I am in pain: for their sin shall be forgiven them.
THUS SAITH THE LORD AGAINST THE PHILISTINES;
Behold, waters come up from the north, and shall become a sweeping torrent, and it shall sweep away the land, and its fulness; the city, and them that dwell in it: and men shall cry and all that dwell in the land shall howl,
at the sound of his rushing, at the sound of his hoofs, and at the rattling of his chariots, at the noise of his wheels: the fathers turned not to their children because of the weakness of their hands,
in the day that is coming to destroy all the Philistines: and I will utterly destroy Tyre and Sidon and all the rest of their allies: for the Lord will destroy the remaining inhabitants of the islands.
Baldness is come upon Gaza; Ascalon is cast away, and the remnant of the Enakim.
How long wilt thou smite, O sword of the Lord? how long will it be ere thou art quiet? return into thy sheath, rest, and be removed.
How shall it be quiet, whereas the Lord has given it a commission against Ascalon, and against the regions on the sea-coast, to awake against the remaining countries!
CONCERNING IDUMEA, thus saith the Lord; There is no longer wisdom in Thaeman, counsel has perished from the wise ones, their wisdom is gone,
their place has been deceived. Dig deep for a dwelling, ye that inhabit Daedam, for he has wrought grievously: I brought trouble upon him in the time at which I visited him.
For grape-gatherers are come, who shall not leave thee a remnant; as thieves by night, they shall lay their hand upon thy possessions.
For I have stripped Esau, I have uncovered their secret places; they shall have no power to hide themselves, they have perished each by the hand of his brother, my neighbour, and it is impossible
for thy fatherless one to be left to live, but I shall live, and the widows trust in me.
For thus saith the Lord; They who were not appointed to drink the cup have drunk it; and thou shalt by no means be cleared:
for by myself I have sworn, saith the Lord, that thou shalt be in the midst of her an impassable land, and a reproach, and a curse; and all her cities shall be desert for ever.
I have heard a report from the Lord, and he has sent messengers to the nations, saying, Assemble yourselves, and come against her; rise ye up to war.
I have made thee small among the nations, utterly contemptible among men.
Thine insolence has risen up against thee, the fierceness of thine heart has burst the holes of the rocks, it has seized upon the strength of a lofty hill; for as an eagle he set his nest on high: thence will I bring thee down.
And Idumea shall be a desert: every one that passes by shall hiss at it.
As Sodom was overthrown and Gomorrha and they that sojourned in her, saith the Lord Almighty, no man shall dwell there, nor shall any son of man inhabit there.
Behold, he shall come up as a lion out of the midst of Jordan to the place of Aetham: for I will speedily drive them from it, and do ye set the young men against her: for who is like me? and who will withstand me? and who is this shepherd, who shall confront me?
Therefore hear ye the counsel of the Lord, which he has framed against Idumea; and his device, which he has devised against the inhabitants of Thaeman: surely the least of the sheep shall be swept off; surely their dwelling shall be made desolate for them.
For at the sound of their fall the earth was scared, and the cry of the sea was not heard.
Behold, he shall look upon her as an eagle, and spread forth his wings over her strongholds; and the heart of the mighty men of Idumea shall be in that day as the heart of a woman in her pangs.
O God, we have heard with our ears, our fathers have told us, the work which thou wroughtest in their days, in the days of old.
Thine hand utterly destroyed the heathen, and thou didst plant them: thou didst afflict the nations, and cast them out.
For they inherited not the land by their own sword, and their own arm did not deliver them; but thy right hand, and thine arm, and the light of thy countenance, because thou wert well pleased in them.
Thou art indeed my King and my God, who commandest deliverances for Jacob.
In thee will we push down our enemies, and in thy name will we bring to nought them that rise up against us.
For I will not trust in my bow, and my sword shall not save me.
For thou hast saved us from them that afflicted us, and hast put to shame them that hated us.
In God will we make our boast all the day, and to thy name will we give thanks for ever. Pause.
But now thou hast cast off, and put us to shame; and thou wilt not go forth with our hosts.
Thou hast turned us back before our enemies; and they that hated us spoiled for themselves.
Thou madest us as sheep for meat; and thou scatteredst us among the nations.
Thou hast sold thy people without price, and there was no profit by their exchange.
Thou hast made us a reproach to our neighbours, a scorn and derision them that are round about us.
Thou hast made us a proverb among the Gentiles, a shaking of the head among the nations.
All the day my shame is before me, and the confusion of my face has covered me,
because of the voice of the slanderer and reviler; because of the enemy and avenger.
All these things are come upon us: but we have not forgotten thee, neither have we dealt unrighteously in thy covenant.
And our heart has not gone back; but thou hast turned aside our paths from thy way.
For thou hast laid us low in a place of affliction, and the shadow of death has covered us.
If we have forgotten the name of our God, and if we have spread out our hands to a strange god; shall not God search these things out?
for he knows the secrets of the heart.
For, for thy sake we are killed all the day long; we are counted as sheep for slaughter.
Awake, wherefore sleepest thou, O Lord? arise, and do not cast us off for ever.
Wherefore turnest thou thy face away, and forgettest our poverty and our affliction?
For our soul has been brought down to the dust; our belly has cleaved to the earth.
Arise, O Lord, help us, and redeem us for thy name's sake.
And the Lord caused his anger to burn forth again in Israel, and Satan stirred up David against them, saying, Go, number Israel and Juda.
And the king said to Joab commander of the host, who was with him, Go now through all the tribes of Israel and Juda, from Dan even to Bersabee, and number the people, and I will know the number of the people.
And Joab said to the king, Now may the Lord add to the people a hundred-fold as many as they are, and may the eyes of my lord the king see it: but why does my lord the king desire this thing?
Nevertheless the word of the king prevailed against Joab an the captains of the host: And Joab and the captains of the host went out before the king to number the people of Israel.
And they went over Jordan, and encamped in Aroer, on the right of the city which is in the midst of the valley of Gad and Eliezer.
And they came to Galaad, and into the land of Thabason, which is Adasai, and they came to Danidan and Udan, and compassed Sidon.
And they came to Mapsar of Tyre, and to all the cities of the Evite and the Chananite: and they came by the South of Juda to Bersabee.
And they compassed the whole land; and they arrived at Jerusalem at the end of nine months and twenty days.
And Joab gave in the number of the census of the people to the king: and Israel consisted of eight hundred thousand men of might that drew sword; and the men of Juda, five hundred thousand fighting men.
And the heart of David smote him after he had numbered the people; and David said to the Lord, I have sinned grievously, O Lord, in what I have now done: remove, I pray thee, the iniquity of thy servant, for I have been exceedingly foolish.
And David rose early in the morning, and the word of the Lord came to the prophet Gad, the seer, saying, Go, and speak to David, saying,
Thus saith the Lord, I bring one of three things upon thee: now choose thee one of them, and I will do it to thee.
And Gad went in to David, and told him, and said to him, Choose one of these things to befall thee, whether there shall come upon thee for three years famine in thy land; or that thou shouldest flee three months before thine enemies, and they should pursue thee; or that there should be for three days mortality in thy land. Now then decide, and see what answer I shall return to him that sent me.
And David said to Gad, On every side I am much straitened: let me fall now into the hands of the Lord, for his compassions are very many; and let me not fall into the hands of man.
So David chose for himself the mortality: and they were the days of wheat-harvest; and the Lord sent a pestilence upon Israel from morning till noon, and the plague began among the people; and there died of the people from Dan even to Bersabee seventy thousand men.
And the angel of the Lord stretched out his hand against Jerusalem to destroy it, and the Lord repented of the evil, and said to the angel that destroyed the people, It is enough now, withhold thine hand. And the angel of the Lord was by the threshing-floor of Orna the Jebusite.
And David spoke to the Lord when he saw the angel smiting the people, and he said, Behold, it is I that have done wrong, but these sheep what have they done? Let thy hand, I pray thee, be upon me, and upon my father's house.
And Gad came to David in that day, and said to him, Go up, and set up to the Lord and altar in the threshing-floor of Orna the Jebusite.
And David went up according to the word of Gad, as the Lord commanded him.
And Orna looked out, and saw the king and his servants coming on before him: and Orna went forth, and did obeisance to the king with his face to the earth.
And Orna said, Why has my lord the king come to his servant? and David said, To buy of thee the threshing-floor, in order to build an altar to the Lord that the plague may be restrained from off the people.
And Orna said to David, Let my lord the king take and offer to the Lord that which is good in his eyes: behold, here are oxen for a whole-burnt-offering, and the wheels and furniture of the oxen for wood.
Orna gave all to the king: and Orna said to the king, The Lord thy God bless thee.
And the king said to Orna, Nay, but I will surely buy it of thee at a fair price, and I will not offer to the Lord my God a whole-burnt-offering for nothing. So David purchased the threshing-floor and the oxen for fifty shekels of silver.
And David built there an altar to the Lord, and offered up whole-burnt-offerings and peace-offerings: and Solomon made an addition to the altar afterwards, for it was little at first. And the Lord hearkened to the land, and the plague was stayed from Israel.
And all the children of Israel went out, and all the congregation was gathered as one man, from Dan even to Bersabee, and in the land of Galaad, to the Lord at Massepha.
And all the tribes of Israel stood before the Lord in the assembly of the people of God, four hundred thousand footmen that drew sword.
And the children of Benjamin heard that the children of Israel were gone up to Massepha: and the children of Israel came and said, Tell us, where did this wickedness take place?
And the Levite, the husband of the woman that was slain, answered and said, I and my concubine went to Gabaa of Benjamin to lodge.
And the men of Gabaa rose up against me, and compassed the house by night against me; they wished to slay me, and they have humbled my concubine, and she is dead.
And I laid hold of my concubine, and divided her in pieces, and sent the parts into every coast of the inheritance of the children of Israel; for they have wrought lewdness and abomination in Israel.
Behold, all ye are children of Israel; and consider and take counsel here among yourselves.
And all the people rose up as one man, saying, No one of us shall return to his tent, and no one of us shall return to his house.
And now this is the thing which shall be done in Gabaa; we will go up against it by lot.
Moreover we will take ten men for a hundred for all the tribes of Israel, and a hundred for a thousand, and a thousand for ten thousand, to take provision, to cause them to come to Gabaa of Benjamin, to do to it according to all the abomination, which they wrought in Israel.
And all the men of Israel were gathered to the city as one man.
And the tribes of Israel sent men through the whole tribe of Benjamin, saying, What is this wickedness that has been wrought among you?
Now then give up the men the sons of transgressors that are in Gabaa, and we will put them to death, and purge out wickedness from Israel: but the children of Benjamin consented not to hearken to the voice of their brethren the children of Israel.
And the children of Benjamin were gathered from their cities to Gabaa, to go forth to fight with the children of Israel.
And the children of Benjamin from their cities were numbered in that day, twenty-three thousand, every man drawing a sword, besides the inhabitants of Gabaa, who were numbered seven hundred chosen men of all the people, able to use both hands alike;
And the children of Israel advanced against the children of Benjamin on the second day.
And the children of Benjamin went forth to meet them from Gabaa on the second day, and destroyed of the children of Israel yet further eighteen thousand men down to the ground: all these drew sword.
And the children of Israel and all the people went up, and came to Baethel; and they wept, and sat there before the Lord; and they fasted on that day until evening, and offered whole-burnt-offerings and perfect sacrifices, before the Lord,
for the ark of the Lord God was there in those days,
and Phinees the son of Eleazar the son of Aaron stood before it in those days; and the children of Israel enquired of the Lord, saying, Shall we yet again go forth to fight with our brethren the sons of Benjamin? and the Lord said, Go up, to-morrow I will give them into your hands.
And the children of Israel set an ambush against Gabaa round about it.
And the children of Israel went up against the children of Benjamin on the third day, and arrayed themselves against Gabaa as before.
And the children of Benjamin went out to meet the people, and were all drawn out of the city, and began to smite and slay the people as before in the roads, whereof one goes up to Baethel, and one to Gabaa in the field, about thirty men of Israel.
And the children of Benjamin said, They fall before us as at the first: but the children of Israel said, Let us flee, and draw them out from the city into the roads; and they did so.
And all the men rose up out of their places, and engaged in Baal Thamar; and the liers in wait of Israel advanced from their place from Maraagabe.
And the Lord smote Benjamin before the children of Israel; and the children of Israel destroyed of Benjamin in that day a hundred and twenty-five thousand men: all these drew sword.
And the children of Benjamin saw that they were smitten; and the men of Israel gave place to Benjamin, because they trusted in the ambuscade which they had prepared against Gabaa.
And when they retreated, then the liers in wait rose up, and they moved toward Gabaa, and the whole ambush came forth, and they smote the city with the edge of the sword.
And the children of Israel had a signal of battle with the liers in wait, that they should send up a signal of smoke from the city.
And the children of Israel saw that the liers in wait had seized Gabaa, and they stood in line of battle; and Benjamin began to smite down wounded ones among the men of Israel about thirty men; for they said, Surely they fall again before us, as in the first battle.
And the signal went up increasingly over the city as a pillar of smoke; and Benjamin looked behind him, and behold the destruction of the city went up to heaven.
And the men of Israel turned back, and the men of Benjamin hasted, because they saw that evil had come upon them.
And they turned to the way of the wilderness from before the children of Israel, and fled: but the battle overtook them, and they from the cities destroyed them in the midst of them.
And they cut down Benjamin, and pursued him from Nua closely till they came opposite Gabaa on the east.
And there fell of Benjamin eighteen thousand men: all these were men of might.
And the rest turned, and fled to the wilderness to the rock of Remmon; and the children of Israel picked off of them five thousand men; and the children of Israel went down after them as far as Gedan, and they smote of them two thousand men.
And all that fell of Benjamin were twenty-five thousand men that drew sword in that day: all these were men of might.
And the rest turned, and fled to the wilderness to the rock of Remmon, even six hundred men; and they sojourned four months in the rock of Remmon.
But the children of Israel committed a great trespass, and purloined part of the accursed thing; and Achar the son of Charmi, the son of Zambri, the son of Zara, of the tribe of Juda, took of the accursed thing; and the Lord was very angry with the children of Israel.
And Joshua sent men to Gai, which is by Baethel, saying, Spy out Gai: and the men went up and spied Gai.
And they returned to Joshua, and said to him, Let not all the people go up, but let about two or three thousand men go up and take the city by siege: carry not up thither the whole people, for the enemy are few.
And there went up about three thousand men, and they fled from before the men of Gai.
And the men of Gai slew of them to the number of thirty-six men, and they pursued them from the gate, and destroyed them from the steep hill; and the heart of the people was alarmed and became as water.
And Joshua tore his garments; and Joshua fell on the earth on his face before the Lord until evening, he and the elders of Israel; and they cast dust on their heads.
And Joshua said, I pray, Lord, wherefore has thy servant brought this people over Jordan to deliver them to the Amorite to destroy us? would we had remained and settled ourselves beyond Jordan.
And what shall I say since Israel has turned his back before his enemy?
And when the Chananite and all the inhabitants of the land hear it, they shall compass us round and destroy us from off the land: and what wilt thou do for thy great name?
And the Lord said to Joshua, Rise up; why hast thou fallen upon thy face?
The people has sinned, and transgressed the covenant which I made with them; they have stolen from the cursed thing, and put it into their store.
And the children of Israel will not be able to stand before their enemies; they will turn their back before their enemies, for they have become an accursed thing: I will not any longer be with you, unless ye remove the cursed thing from yourselves.
Rise, sanctify the people and tell them to sanctify themselves for the morrow: thus says the Lord God of Israel, The accursed thing is among you; ye shall not be able to stand before your enemies, until ye shall have removed the cursed thing from among you.
And ye shall all be gathered together by your tribes in the morning, and it shall come to pass that the tribe which the Lord shall shew, ye shall bring by families; and the family which the Lord shall shew, ye shall bring by households; and the household which the Lord shall shew, ye shall bring man by man.
And the man who shall be pointed out, shall be burnt with fire, and all that he has; because he has transgressed the covenant of the Lord, and has wrought wickedness in Israel.
And Joshua rose up early, and brought the people by their tribes; and the tribe of Juda was pointed out.
And it was brought by their families, and family of the Zaraites was pointed out.
And it was brought man by man, and Achar the son of Zambri the son of Zara was pointed out.
And Joshua said to Achar, Give glory this day to the Lord God of Israel, and make confession; and tell me what thou hast done, and hide it not from me.
And Achar answered Joshua, and said, Indeed I have sinned against the Lord God of Israel: thus and thus have I done:
I saw in the spoil an embroidered mantle, and two hundred didrachms of silver, and one golden wedge of fifty didrachms, and I desired them and took them; and, behold, they are hid in my tent, and the silver is hid under them.
And Joshua sent messengers, and they ran to the tent into the camp; and these things were hidden in his tent, and the silver under them.
And they brought them out of the tent, and brought them to Joshua and the elders of Israel, and they laid them before the Lord.
And Joshua took Achar the son of Zara, and brought him to the valley of Achor, and his sons, and his daughters, and his calves, and his asses, and all his sheep, and his tent, and all his property, and all the people were with him; and he brought them to Emec Achor.
And Joshua said to Achar, Why hast thou destroyed us? the Lord destroy thee as at this day. And all Israel stoned him with stones.
And they set up over him a great heap of stones; and the Lord ceased from his fierce anger. Therefore he called the place Emecachor until this day.
And the word of the Lord came to Jonas the second time, saying,
Rise, go to Nineve, the great city, and preach in it according to the former preaching which I spoke to thee of.
And Jonas arose, and went to Nineve, as the Lord had spoken. Now Nineve was an exceeding great city, of about three days' journey.
And Jonas began to enter into the city about a day's journey, and he proclaimed, and said, Yet three days, and Nineve shall be overthrown.
And the men of Nineve believed God, and proclaimed a fast, and put on sackcloths, from the greatest of them to the least of them.
And the word reached the king of Nineve, and he arose from off his throne, and took off his raiment from him, and put on sackcloth, and sat on ashes.
And proclamation was made, and it was commanded in Nineve by the king an by his great men, saying, Let not men, or cattle, or oxen, or sheep, taste any thing, nor feed, nor drink water.
So men and cattle were clothed with sackcloths, and cried earnestly to God; and they turned every one from their evil way, and from the iniquity that was in their hands, saying,
Who knows if God will repent, and turn from his fierce anger, and so we shall not perish?
And God saw their works, that they turned from their evil ways; and God repented of the evil which he had said he would do to them; and he did it not.
O Lord God, I will glorify thee, I will sing to thy name; for thou hast done wonderful things, even an ancient and faithful counsel. So be it.
For thou hast made cities a heap, even cities made strong that their foundations should not fall: the city of ungodly men shall not be built for ever.
Therefore shall the poor people bless thee, and cities of injured men shall bless thee.
For thou hast been a helper to every lowly city, and a shelter to them that were disheartened by reason of poverty: thou shalt deliver them from wicked men: thou hast been a shelter of them that thirst, and a refreshing air to injured men.
We were as faint-hearted men thirsting in Sion, by reason of ungodly men to whom thou didst deliver us.
And the Lord of hosts shall make a feast for all the nations: on this mount they shall drink gladness, they shall drink wine:
they shall anoint themselves with ointment in this mountain. Impart thou all these things to the nations; for this is God's counsel upon all the nations.
Death has prevailed and swallowed men up; but again the Lord God has taken away every tear from every face. He has taken away the reproach of his people from all the earth: for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.
And in that day they shall say, behold our God in whom we have trusted, and he shall save us: this is the Lord; we have waited for him, and we have exulted, and will rejoice in our salvation.
God will give rest on this mountain, and the country of Moab shall be trodden down, as they tread the floor with waggons.
And he shall spread forth his hands, even as he also brings down man to destroy him: and he shall bring low his pride in regard to the thing on which he has laid his hands.
And he shall bring down the height of the refuge of the wall, and it shall come down even to the ground.
I will give thee thanks, O Lord, with my whole heart, in the council of the upright, and in the congregation.
The works of the Lord are great, sought out according to all his will.
His work is worthy of thanksgiving and honour: and his righteousness endures for ever and ever.
He has caused his wonderful works to be remembered: the Lord is merciful and compassionate.
He has given food to them that fear him: he will remember his covenant for ever.
He has declared to his people the power of his works, to give them the inheritance of the heathen.
The works of his hands are truth and judgment: all his commandments are sure:
established for ever and ever, done in truth and uprightness.
He sent redemption to his people: he commanded his covenant for ever: holy and fearful is his name.
The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and all that act accordingly have a good understanding; his praise endures for ever and ever.
Have mercy upon me, O God; for man has trodden me down; all the day long he warring has afflicted me.
Mine enemies have trodden me down all the day from the dawning of the day; for there are many warring against me.
They shall be afraid, but I will trust in thee.
In God I will praise my words; all the day have I hoped in God; I will not fear what flesh shall do to me.
All the day long they have abominated my words; all their devices are against me for evil.
They will dwell near and hide themselves; they will watch my steps, accordingly as I have waited patiently in my soul.
Thou wilt on no account save them; thou wilt bring down the people in wrath.
O God, I have declared my life to thee; thou has set my tears before thee, even according to thy promise.
Mine enemies shall be turned back, in the day wherein I shall call upon thee; behold, I know that thou art my God.
In God, will I praise his word; in the Lord will I praise his saying.
I have hoped in God; I will not be afraid of what man shall do to me.
The vows of thy praise, O God, which I will pay, are upon me.
For thou hast delivered my soul from death, and my feet from sliding, that I should be well-pleasing before God in the land of the living.
He that is merciful will lend unto his neighbour; and he that strengtheneth his hand keepeth the commandments.
Lend to thy neighbour in time of his need, and pay thou thy neighbour again in due season.
Keep thy word, and deal faithfully with him, and thou shalt always find the thing that is necessary for thee.
Many, when a thing was lent them, reckoned it to be found, and put them to trouble that helped them.
Till he hath received, he will kiss a man's hand; and for his neighbour's money he will speak submissly: but when he should repay, he will prolong the time, and return words of grief, and complain of the time.
If he prevail, he shall hardly receive the half, and he will count as if he had found it: if not, he hath deprived him of his money, and he hath gotten him an enemy without cause: he payeth him with cursings and railings; and for honour he will pay him disgrace.
Many therefore have refused to lend for other men's ill dealing, fearing to be defrauded.
Yet have thou patience with a man in poor estate, and delay not to shew him mercy.
Help the poor for the commandment's sake, and turn him not away because of his poverty.
Lose thy money for thy brother and thy friend, and let it not rust under a stone to be lost.
Lay up thy treasure according to the commandments of the most High, and it shall bring thee more profit than gold.
Shut up alms in thy storehouses: and it shall deliver thee from all affliction.
It shall fight for thee against thine enemies better than a mighty shield and strong spear.
An honest man is surety for his neighbour: but he that is impudent will forsake him.
Forget not the friendship of thy surety, for he hath given his life for thee.
A sinner will overthrow the good estate of his surety:
And he that is of an unthankful mind will leave him in danger that delivered him.
Suretiship hath undone many of good estate, and shaken them as a wave of the sea: mighty men hath it driven from their houses, so that they wandered among strange nations.
A wicked man transgressing the commandments of the Lord shall fall into suretiship: and he that undertaketh and followeth other men's business for gain shall fall into suits.
Help thy neighbour according to thy power, and beware that thou thyself fall not into the same.
The chief thing for life is water, and bread, and clothing, and an house to cover shame.
Better is the life of a poor man in a mean cottage, than delicate fare in another man's house.
Be it little or much, hold thee contented, that thou hear not the reproach of thy house.
For it is a miserable life to go from house to house: for where thou art a stranger, thou darest not open thy mouth.
Thou shalt entertain, and feast, and have no thanks: moreover thou shalt hear bitter words:
Come, thou stranger, and furnish a table, and feed me of that thou hast ready.
Give place, thou stranger, to an honourable man; my brother cometh to be lodged, and I have need of mine house.
These things are grievous to a man of understanding; the upbraiding of houseroom, and reproaching of the lender.
I am a flower of the plain, a lily of the valleys.
As a lily among thorns, so is my companion among the daughters.
As the apple among the trees of the wood, so is my kinsman among the sons. I desired his shadow, and sat down, and his fruit was sweet in my throat.
Bring me into the wine house; set love before me.
Strengthen me with perfumes, stay me with apples: for I am wounded with love.
His left hand shall be under my head, and his right hand shall embrace me.
I have charged you, ye daughters of Jerusalem, by the powers and by the virtues of the field, that ye do not rouse or wake my love, until he please.
The voice of my kinsman! behold, he comes leaping over the mountains, bounding over the hills.
My kinsman is like a roe or a young hart on the mountains of Baethel: behold, he is behind our wall, looking through the windows, peeping through the lattices.
My kinsman answers, and says to me, Rise up, come, my companion, my fair one, my dove.
For, behold, the winter is past, the rain is gone, it has departed.
The flowers are seen in the land; the time of pruning has arrived; the voice of the turtle-dove has been heard in our land.
The fig-tree has put forth its young figs, the vines put forth the tender grape, they yield a smell: arise, come, my companion, my fair one, my dove; yea, come.
Thou art my dove, in the shelter of the rock, near the wall: shew me thy face, and cause me to hear thy voice; for thy voice is sweet, and thy countenance is beautiful.
Take us the little foxes that spoil the vines: for our vines put forth tender grapes.
My kinsman is mine, and I am his: he feeds his flock among the lilies.
Until the day dawn, and the shadows depart, turn, my kinsman, be thou like to a roe or young hart on the mountains of the ravines.
And when Jabis the king of Asor heard, he sent to Jobab king of Maron, and to the king of Symoon, and to the king of Aziph,
and to the kings who were by the great Sidon, to the hill country and to Araba opposite Keneroth, and to the plain, and to Phenaeddor,
and to the Chananites on the coast eastward, and to the Amorites on the coast, and the Chettites, and the Pherezites, and the Jebusites in the mountain, and the Evites, and those dwelling under mount Aermon in the land Massyma.
And they and their kings with them went forth, as the sand of the sea in multitude, and horses, and very many chariots.
And all the kings assembled in person, and came to the same place, and encamped at the waters of Maron to war with Israel.
And the Lord said to Joshua, Be not afraid of them, for to-morrow at this time I will put them to flight before Israel: thou shalt hough their horses, and burn their chariots with fire
And Joshua and all the men of war came upon them at the water of Maron suddenly; and they attacked them in the hill country.
And the Lord delivered them into the power of Israel; and they smote them and pursued them to great Sidon, and to Maseron, and to the plains of Massoch eastward; and they destroyed them till there was not one of them left that survived.
And Joshua did to them, as the Lord commanded him: he houghed their horses, and burned their chariots with fire.
And Joshua returned at that time, and took Asor and her king; now Asor in former time was the chief of these kingdoms.
And they slew with the sword all that breathed in it, and utterly destroyed them all, and there was no living thing left in it; and they burnt Asor with fire.
And Joshua took all the cities of the kingdoms, and their kings, and slew them with the edge of the sword; and utterly slew them, as Moses the servant of the Lord commanded.
But all the walled cities Israel burnt not; but Israel burnt Asor only.
And the children of Israel took all its spoils to themselves; and they slew all the men with the edge of the sword, until he destroyed them; they left not one of them breathing.
As the Lord commanded his servant Moses, even so Moses commanded Joshua; and so Joshua did, he transgressed no precept of all that Moses commanded him.
And Joshua took all the hill country, and all the land of Nageb, and all the land of Gosom, and the plain country, and that toward the west, and the mountain of Israel and the low country by the mountain;
from the mountain of Chelcha, and that which goes up to Seir, and as far as Balagad, and the plains of Libanus, under mount Aermon; and he took all their kings, and destroyed, and slew them.
And for many days Joshua waged war with these kings.
And there was no city which Israel took not; they took all in war.
For it was of the Lord to harden their hearts to go forth to war against Israel, that they might be utterly destroyed, that mercy should not be granted to them, but that they should be utterly destroyed, as the Lord said to Moses.
And Joshua came at that time, and utterly destroyed the Enakim out of the hill country, from Chebron and from Dabir, and from Anaboth, and from all the race of Israel, and from all the mountain of Juda with their cities; and Joshua utterly destroyed them.
There was not any one left of the Enakim by the children of Israel, only there was left of them in Gaza, and in Gath, and in Aseldo.
And Joshua took all the land, as the Lord commanded Moses; and Joshua gave them for an inheritance to Israel by division according to their tribes; and the land ceased from war.
Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem; praise thy God, O Sion.
For he has strengthened the bars of thy gates; he has blessed thy children within thee.
He makes thy borders peaceful, and fills thee with the flour of wheat.
He sends his oracle to the earth: his word will run swiftly.
He gives snow like wool: he scatters the mist like ashes.
Casting forth his ice like morsels: who shall stand before his cold?
He shall send out his word, and melt them: he shall blow with his wind, and the waters shall flow.
He sends his word to Jacob, his ordinances and judgments to Israel.
He has not done so to any other nation; and he has not shewn them his judgments.
But call, if any one will hearken to thee, or if thou shalt see any of the holy angels.
For wrath destroys the foolish one, and envy slays him that has gone astray.
And I have seen foolish ones taking root: but suddenly their habitation was devoured.
Let their children be far from safety, and let them be crushed at the doors of vile men, and let there be no deliverer.
For what they have collected, the just shall eat; but they shall not be delivered out of calamities: let their strength be utterly exhausted.
For labour cannot by any means come out of the earth, nor shall trouble spring out of the mountains:
yet man is born to labour, and even so the vulture's young seek the high places.
Nevertheless I will beseech the Lord, and will call upon the Lord, the sovereign of all;
who does great things and untraceable, glorious things also, and marvellous, of which there is no number:
who gives rain upon the earth, sending water on the earth:
who exalts the lowly, and raises up them that are lost:
frustrating the counsels of the crafty, and their hands shall not perform the truth:
who takes the wise in their wisdom, and subverts the counsel of the crafty
In the day darkness shall come upon them, and let them grope in the noon-day even as in the night:
and let them perish in war, and let the weak escape from the hand of the mighty.
And let the weak have hope, but the mouth of the unjust be stopped.
But blessed is the man whom the Lord has reproved; and reject not thou the chastening of the Almighty.
for he causes a man to be in pain, and restores him again: he smites, and his hands heal.
Six time he shall deliver thee out of distresses: and in the seventh harm shall not touch thee.
In famine he shall deliver thee from death: and in war he shall free thee from the power of the sword.
He shall hide thee from the scourge of the tongue: and thou shalt not be afraid of coming evils.
Thou shalt laugh at the unrighteous and the lawless: and thou shalt not be afraid of wild beasts.
For the wild beasts of the field shall be at peace with thee.
Then shalt thou know that thy house shall be at peace, and the provision for thy tabernacle shall not fail.
And thou shalt know that thy seed shall be abundant; and thy children shall be like the herbage of the field.
And thou shalt come to the grave like ripe corn reaped in its season, or as a heap of the corn-flour collected in proper time.
Behold, we have thus sought out these matters; these are what we have heard: but do thou reflect with thyself, if thou hast done anything wrong.
And the men of Cariathiarim come, and bring up the ark of the covenant of the Lord: and they bring it into the house of Aminadab in the hill; and they sanctified Eleazar his son to keep the ark of the covenant of the Lord.
And it came to pass from the time that the ark was in Cariathiarim, the days were multiplied, and the time was twenty years; and all the house of Israel looked after the Lord.
And Samuel spoke to all the house of Israel, saying, If ye do with all your heart return to the Lord, take away the strange gods from the midst of you, and the groves, and prepare your hearts to serve the Lord, and serve him only; and he shall deliver you from the hand of the Philistines.
And the children of Israel took away Baalim and the groves of Astaroth, and served the Lord only.
And Samuel said, Gather all Israel to Massephath, and I will pray for you to the Lord.
And they were gathered together to Massephath, and they drew water, and poured it out upon the earth before the Lord. And they fasted on that day, and said, We have sinned before the Lord. And Samuel judged the children of Israel in Massephath.
And the Philistines heard that all the children of Israel were gathered together to Massephath: and the lords of the Philistines went up against Israel: and the children of Israel heard, and they feared before the Philistines.
And the children of Israel said to Samuel, Cease not to cry to the Lord thy God for us, and he shall save us out of the hand of the Philistines.
And Samuel took a sucking lamb, and offered it up as a whole-burnt-offering with all the people to the Lord: and Samuel cried to the Lord for Israel, and the Lord heard him.
And Samuel was offering the whole-burnt-offering; and the Philistines drew near to war against Israel; and the Lord thundered with a mighty sound in that day upon the Philistines, and they were confounded and overthrown before Israel.
And the men of Israel went forth out of Massephath, and pursued the Philistines, and smote them to the parts under Baethchor.
And Samuel took a stone, and set it up between Massephath and the old city; and he called the name of it Abenezer, stone of the helper; and he said, Hitherto has the Lord helped us.
So the Lord humbled the Philistines, and they did not anymore come into the border of Israel; and the hand of the Lord was against the Philistines all the days of Samuel.
And the cities which the Philistines took from the children of Israel were restored; and they restored them to Israel from Ascalon to Azob: and they took the coast of Israel out of the hand of the Philistines; and there was peace between Israel and the Amorite.
And Samuel judged Israel all the days of his life.
And he went year by year, and went round Baethel, and Galgala, and Massephath; and he judged Israel in all these consecrated places.
And his return was to Armathaim, because there was his house; and there he judged Israel, and built there an altar to the Lord.
Wherefore did the heathen rage, and the nations imagine vain things?
The kings of the earth stood up, and the rulers gathered themselves together, against the Lord, and against his Christ;
saying, Let us break through their bonds, and cast away their yoke from us.
He that dwells in the heavens shall laugh them to scorn, and the Lord shall mock them.
Then shall he speak to them in his anger, and trouble them in his fury.
But I have been made king by him on Sion his holy mountain,
declaring the ordinance of the Lord: the Lord said to me, Thou art my Son, to-day have I begotten thee.
Ask of me, and I will give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the ends of the earth for thy possession.
Thou shalt rule them with a rod of iron; thou shalt dash them in pieces as a potter's vessel.
Now therefore understand, ye kings: be instructed, all ye that judge the earth.
Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice in him with trembling.
Accept correction, lest at any time the Lord be angry, and ye should perish from the righteous way: whensoever his wrath shall be suddenly kindled, blessed are all they that trust in him.
And to Moses he said, Go up to the Lord, thou and Aaron and Nadab and Abiud, and seventy of the elders of Israel: and they shall worship the Lord from a distance.
And Moses alone shall draw nigh to God; and they shall not draw nigh, and the people shall not come up with them.
And Moses went in and related to the people all the words of God and the ordinances; and all the people answered with one voice, saying, All the words which the Lord has spoken, we will do and be obedient.
And Moses wrote all the words of the Lord; and Moses rose up early in the morning, and built an altar under the mountain, and set up twelve stones for the twelve tribes of Israel.
And he sent forth the young men of the children of Israel, and they offered whole burnt-offerings, and they sacrificed young calves as a peace-offering to God.
And Moses took half the blood and poured it into bowls, and half the blood he poured out upon the altar.
And he took the book of the covenant and read it in the ears of the people, and they said, All things whatsoever the Lord has spoken we will do and hearken therein.
And Moses took the blood and sprinkled it upon the people, and said, Behold the blood of the covenant, which the Lord has made with you concerning all these words.
And Moses went up, and Aaron, and Nadab and Abiud, and seventy of the elders of Israel.
And they saw the place where the God of Israel stood; and under his feet was as it were a work of sapphire slabs, and as it were the appearance of the firmament of heaven in its purity.
And of the chosen ones of Israel there was not even one missing, and they appeared in the place of God, and did eat and drink.
And the Lord said to Moses, Come up to me into the mountain, and be there; and I will give thee the tables of stone, the law and the commandments, which I have written to give them laws.
And Moses rose up and Joshua his attendant, and they went up into the mount of God.
And to the elders they said, Rest there till we return to you; and behold, Aaron and Or are with you: if any man have a cause to be tried, let them go to them.
And Moses and Joshua went up to the mountain, and the cloud covered the mountain.
And the glory of God came down upon the mount Sina, and the cloud covered it six days; and the Lord called Moses on the seventh day out of the midst of the cloud.
And the appearance of the glory of the Lord was as burning fire on the top of the mountain, before the children of Israel.
And Moses went into the midst of the cloud, and went up to the mountain, and was there in the mountain forty days and forty nights.
And it came to pass after Isaac was old, that his eyes were dimmed so that he could not see; and he called Esau, his elder son, and said to him, My son; and he said, Behold, I .
And he said, Behold, I am grown old, and know not the day of my death.
Now then take the weapons, both thy quiver and thy bow, and go into the plain, and get me venison,
and make me meats, as I like them, and bring them to me that I may eat, that my soul may bless thee, before I die.
And Isaac said to Jacob, Draw night to me, and I will feel thee, son, if thou art my son Esau or not.
And Jacob drew nigh to his father Isaac, and he felt him, and said, The voice Jacob's voice, but the hands the hands of Esau.
And he knew him not, for his hands were as the hands of his brother Esau, hairy; and he blessed him,
And he drew nigh and kissed him, and smelled the smell of his garments, and blessed him, and said, Behold, the smell of my son is as the smell of an abundant field, which the Lord has blessed.
And may God give thee of the dew of heaven, and of the fatness of the earth, and abundance of corn and wine.
And let nations serve thee, and princes bow down to thee, and be thou lord of thy brother, and the sons of thy father shall do thee reverence; accursed is he that curses thee, and blessed is he that blesses thee.
And Esau was angry with Jacob because of the blessing, with which his father blessed him; and Esau said in his mind, Let the days of my father's mourning draw nigh, that I may slay my brother Jacob.
And the words of Esau her elder son were reported to Rebecca, and she sent and called Jacob her younger son, and said to him, Behold, Esau thy brother threatens thee to kill thee.
And Rebecca said to Isaac, I am weary of my life, because of the daughters of the sons of Chet; if Jacob shall take a wife of the daughters of this land, wherefore should I live?
Praise ye the Lord: for psalmody is a good thing; let praise be sweetly sung to our God.
The Lord builds up Jerusalem; and he will gather together the dispersed of Israel.
He heals the broken in heart, and binds up their wounds.
He numbers the multitudes of stars; and calls them all by names.
Great is our Lord, and great is his strength; and his understanding is infinite.
The Lord lifts up the meek; but brings sinners down to the ground.
Begin the song with thanksgiving to the Lord; sing praises on the harp to our God:
who covers the heaven with clouds, who prepares rain for the earth, who causes grass to spring up on the mountains, [and green herb for the service of men;]
and gives cattle their food, and to the young ravens that call upon him.
He will not take pleasure in the strength of a horse; neither is he well-pleased with the legs of a man.
The Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him, and in all that hope in his mercy.
Then Eliphaz the Thaemanite answered and said,
Hast thou been often spoken to in distress? but who shall endure the force of thy words?
For whereas thou hast instructed many, and hast strengthened the hands of the weak one,
and hast supported the failing with words, and hast imparted courage to feeble knees.
Yet now that pain has come upon thee, and touched thee, thou art troubled.
Is not thy fear founded in folly, thy hope also, and the mischief of thy way?
Remember then who has perished, being pure? or when were the true-hearted utterly destroyed?
Accordingly as I have seen men ploughing barren places, and they that sow them will reap sorrows for themselves.
They shall perish by the command of the Lord, and shall be utterly consumed by the breath of his wrath.
The strength of the lion, and the voice of the lioness, and the exulting cry of serpents are quenched.
The old lion has perished for want of food, and the lions' whelps have forsaken one another.
But if there had been any truth in thy words, none of these evils would have befallen thee. Shall not mine ear receive excellent revelations from him?
But as when terror falls upon men, with dread and a sound in the night,
horror and trembling seized me, and caused all my bones greatly to shake.
And a spirit came before my face; and my hair and flesh quivered.
I arose and perceived it not: I looked, and there, was no form before my eyes: but I only heard a breath and a voice, saying,
What, shall a mortal be pure before the Lord? or a man be blameless in regard to his works?
Whereas he trust not in his servants, and perceives perverseness in his angels.
But as for them that dwell in houses of clay, of whom we also are formed of the same clay, he smites them like a moth.
And from the morning to evening they no longer exist: they have perished, because they cannot help themselves.
For he blows upon them, and they are withered: they have perished for lack of wisdom.
And the ark was seven months in the country of the Philistines, and their land brought forth swarms of mice.
And the Philistines call their priests, and their prophets, and their enchanters, saying, What shall we do to the ark of the Lord? teach us wherewith we shall send it away to its place.
And they said, If ye send away the ark of the covenant of the Lord God of Israel, do not on any account send it away empty, but by all means render to it an offering for the plague; and then shall ye be healed, and an atonement shall be made for you: should not his hand be thus stayed from off you?
And they say, What is the offering for the plague which we shall return to it? and they said,
According to the number of the lords of the Philistines, five golden emerods, for the plague was on you, and on your rulers, and on the people; and golden mice, the likeness of the mice that destroy your land: and ye shall give glory to the Lord, that he may lighten his hand from off you, and from off your gods, and from off your land.
And why do ye harden your hearts, as Egypt and Pharao hardened their hearts? was it not so when he mocked them, that they let the people go, and they departed?
And now take wood and make a new wagon, and take two cows, that have calved for the first time, without their calves; and do ye yoke the cows to the wagon, and lead away the calves from behind them home.
And ye shall take the ark and put it on the wagon; and ye shall restore to it the golden articles for the trespass-offering in a coffer by the side of it: and ye shall let it go, and sent it away, and ye shall depart.
And ye shall see, if it shall go the way of its coasts along by Baethsamys, he has brought upon us this great affliction; and if not, then shall we know that his hand has not touched us, but this is a chance which has happened to us.
And the Philistines did so; and they took two cows that had calved for the first time, and yoked them to the waggon, and shut up their calves at home.
And they set the ark of the Lord, and the coffer, and the golden mice, on the waggon.
And the cows went straight on the way to the way of Baethsamys, they went along one track; and laboured, and turned not aside to the right hand or to the left, and the lords of the Philistines went after it as far as the coasts of Baethsamys.
And the men of Baethsamys were reaping the wheat harvest in the valley; and they lifted up their eyes, and saw the ark of the Lord, and rejoiced to meet it.
And the waggon entered into the field of Osee, which was in Baethsamys, and they set there by it a great stone; and they split the wood of the waggon, and offered up the cows for a whole-burnt-offering to the Lord.
And the Levites brought up the ark of the Lord, and the coffer with it, and the golden articles upon it, and placed them on the great stone, and the men of Baethsamys offered whole-burnt-offerings and meat offerings on that day to the Lord.
And the five lords of the Philistines saw, and returned to Ascalon in that day.
And these are the golden emerods which the lords of the Philistines gave as a trespass-offering to the Lord; for Azotus one, for Gaza one, for Ascalon one, for Geth one, for Accaron one.
And the golden mice according to the number of all the cities of the Philistines, belonging to the five lords, from the fenced city to the village of the Pherezite, and to the great stone, on which they placed the ark of the covenant of the Lord, that was in the field of Osee the Baethsamysite.
And the sons of Jechonias were not pleased with the men of Baethsamys, because they saw the ark of the Lord; and the Lord smote among them seventy men, and fifty thousand men: and the people mourned, because the Lord had inflicted on the people, a very great plague.
And the men of Baethsamys said, Who shall be able to pass before this holy Lord God? and to whom shall the ark of the Lord go up from us?
And they send messengers to the inhabitants of Cariathiarim, saying, The Philistines have brought back the ark of the Lord, go down and take it home to yourselves.
O Lord, why are they that afflict me multiplied? many rise up against me.
Many say concerning my soul, There is no deliverance for him in his God. Pause.
But thou, O Lord, art my helper: my glory, and the one that lifts up my head.
I cried to the Lord with my voice, and he heard me out of his holy mountain. Pause.
I lay down and slept; I awaked; for the Lord will help me.
I will not be afraid of ten thousands of people, who beset me round about.
Arise, Lord; deliver me, my God: for thou hast smitten all who were without cause mine enemies; thou hast broken the teeth of sinners.
Deliverance is the Lord's, and thy blessing is upon thy people.
See, thou shalt make them according to the pattern shewed thee in the mount.
By night on my bed I sought him whom my soul loves: I sought him, but found him not; I called him, but he hearkened not to me.
I will rise now, and go about in the city, in the market-places, and in the streets, and I will seek him whom my soul loves: I sought him, but I found him not.
The watchmen who go their rounds in the city found me. I said, Have ye seen him whom my soul loves?
It was as a little while after I parted from them, that I found him whom my soul loves: I held him, and did not let him go, until I brought him into my mother's house, and into the chamber of her that conceived me.
I have charged you, O daughters of Jerusalem, by the powers and by the virtues of the field, that ye rouse not nor awake my love, until he please.
Who is this that comes up from the wilderness as pillars of smoke, perfumed with myrrh and frankincense, with all powders of the perfumer?
Behold Solomon's bed; sixty mighty men of the mighty ones of Israel are round about it.
They all hold a sword, being expert in war: every man has his sword upon his thigh because of fear by night.
King Solomon made himself a litter of woods of Lebanon.
He made the pillars of it silver, the bottom of it gold, the covering of it scarlet, in the midst of it a pavement of love, for the daughters of Jerusalem.
Go forth, ye daughters of Sion, and behold king Solomon, with the crown wherewith his mother crowned him, in the day of his espousals, and in the day of the gladness of his heart.
And when Adoni-bezec king of Jerusalem heard that Joshua had taken Gai, and had destroyed it, as he did to Jericho and its king, even so they did to Gai and its king, and that the inhabitants of Gabaon had gone over to Joshua and Israel;
then they were greatly terrified by them, for the king knew that Gabaon was a great city, as one of the chief cities, and all its men were mighty.
So Adoni-bezec king of Jerusalem sent to Elam king of Hebron, and to Phidon king of Jerimuth, and to Jephtha king of Lachis, and to Dabin king of Odollam, saying,
Come up hither to me, and help me, and let us take Gabaon; for the Gabaonites have gone over to Joshua and to the children of Israel.
And the five kings of the Jebusites went up, the king of Jerusalem, and the king of Chebron, and the king of Jerimuth, and the king of Lachis, and the king of Odollam, they and all their people; and encamped around Gabaon, and besieged it.
And the inhabitants of Gabaon sent to Joshua into the camp to Galgala, saying, Slack not thy hands from thy servants: come up quickly to us, and help us, and rescue us; for all the kings of the Amorites who dwell in the hill country are gathered together against us.
And Joshua went up from Galgala, he and all the people of war with him, every one mighty in strength.
And the Lord said to Joshua, Fear them not, for I have delivered them into thy hands; there shall not one of them be left before you.
And when Joshua came suddenly upon them, he had advanced all the night out of Galgala.
And the Lord struck them with terror before the children of Israel; and the Lord destroyed them with a great slaughter at Gabaon; and they pursued them by the way of the going up of Oronin, and they smote them to Azeca and to Makeda.
And when they fled from the face of the children of Israel at the descent of Oronin, then the Lord cast upon them hailstones from heaven to Azeca; and they were more that died by the hailstones, than those whom the children of Israel slew with the sword in the battle.
Then Joshua spoke to the Lord, in the day in which the Lord delivered the Amorite into the power of Israel, when he destroyed them in Gabaon, and they were destroyed from before the children of Israel: and Joshua said, Let the sun stand over against Gabaon, and the moon over against the valley of Aelon.
And the sun and the moon stood still, until God executed vengeance on their enemies; and the sun stood still in the midst of heaven; it did not proceed to set till the end of one day.
And there was not such a day either before or after, so that God should hearken to a man, because the Lord fought on the side of Israel.
And these five kings fled, and hid themselves in a cave that is in Makeda.
And it was told Joshua, saying, The five kings have been found hid in the cave that is in Makeda.
And Joshua said, Roll stones to the mouth of the cave, and set men to watch over them.
But do not ye stand, but pursue after your enemies, and attack the rear of them, and do not suffer them to enter into their cities; for the Lord our God has delivered them into our hands.
And it came to pass when Joshua and all Israel ceased destroying them utterly with a very great slaughter, that they that escaped took refuge in the strong cities.
And all the people returned safe to Joshua to Makeda; and no one of the children of Israel murmured with his tongue.
And Joshua said, Open the cave, and bring out these five kings out of the cave.
And they brought out the five kings out of the cave, the king of Jerusalem, and the king of Chebron, and the king of Jerimuth, and the king of Lachis, and the king of Odollam.
And when they brought them out to Joshua, then Joshua called together all Israel, and the chiefs of the army that went with him, saying to them, Come forward and set your feet on their necks; and they came and set their feet on their necks.
And Joshua said to them, Do not fear them, neither be cowardly; be courageous and strong, for thus the Lord will do to all your enemies, against whom ye fight.
And Joshua and all Israel with him departed to Chebron, and encamped about it.
And he smote it with the edge of the sword, and all the living creatures that were in it; there was no one preserved: they destroyed it and all things in it, as they did to Odollam.
And Joshua and all Israel returned to Dabir; and they encamped about it;
and they took it, and its king, and its villages: and he smote it with the edge of the sword, and they destroyed it, and every thing breathing in it; and they did not leave in it any one that was preserved: as they did to Chebron and her king, so they did to Dabir and her king.
And Joshua smote all the land of the hill country, and Nageb and the plain country, and Asedoth, and her kings, they did not leave of them one that was saved: and they utterly destroyed every thing that had the breath of life, as the Lord God of Israel commanded,
from Cades Barne to Gaza, all Gosom, as far as Gabaon.
And Joshua smote, once for all, all their kings, and their land, because the Lord God of Israel fought on the side of Israel.
Behold, the Lord is about to lay waste the world, and will make it desolate, and will lay bare the surface of it, and scatter them that dwell therein.
And the people shall be as the priest, and the servant as the lord, and the maid as the mistress; the buyer shall be as the seller, the lender as the borrower, and the debtor as his creditor.
The earth shall be completely laid waste, and the earth shall be utterly spoiled: for the mouth of the Lord has spoken these things.
The earth mourns, and the world is ruined, the lofty ones of the earth are mourning.
And she has sinned by reason of her inhabitants; because they have transgressed the law, and changed the ordinances, even the everlasting covenant.
Therefore a curse shall consume the earth, because the inhabitants thereof have sinned: therefore the dwellers in the earth shall be poor, and few men shall be left.
The wine shall mourn, the vine shall mourn, all the merry-hearted shall sigh.
The mirth of timbrels has ceased, the sound of the harp has ceased.
They are ashamed, they have not drunk wine; strong drink has become bitter to them that drink it.
All the city has become desolate: one shall shut his house so that none shall enter.
There is a howling for the wine everywhere; all the mirth of the land has ceased, all the mirth of the land has departed.
And cities shall be left desolate, and houses being left shall fall to ruin.
All this shall be in the land in the midst of the nations, as if one should strip an olive tree, so shall they strip them; but when the vintage is done,
these shall cry aloud; and they that are left on the land shall rejoice together in the glory of the Lord: the water of the sea shall be troubled.
Therefore shall the glory of the Lord be in the isles of the sea; the name of the Lord shall be glorious.
O Lord God of Israel, from the ends of the earth we have heard wonderful things, and there is hope to the godly: but they shall say, Woe to the despisers, that despise the law.
Fear, and a pit, and a snare, are upon you that dwell on the earth.
And it shall come to pass, that he that flees from the fear shall fall into the pit; and he that comes up out of the pit shall be caught by the snare: for windows have been opened in heaven, and the foundations of the earth shall be shaken,
the earth shall be utterly confounded, and the earth shall be completely perplexed.
It reels as a drunkard and one oppressed with wine, and the earth shall be shaken as a storehouse of fruits; for iniquity has prevailed upon it, and it shall fall, and shall not be able to rise.
And God shall bring his hand upon the host of heaven, and upon the kings of the earth.
And they shall gather the multitude thereof into prisons, and they shall shut them into a strong hold: after many generations they shall be visited.
And the brick shall decay, and the wall shall fall; for the Lord shall reign from out of Sion, and out of Jerusalem, and shall be glorified before his elders.
Blessed is the man that fears the Lord: he will delight greatly in his commandments.
His seed shall be mighty in the earth: the generation of the upright shall be blessed.
Glory and riches shall be in his house; and his righteousness endures for evermore.
To the upright light has sprung up in darkness: he is pitiful, and merciful, and righteous.
The good man is he that pities and lends: he will direct his affairs with judgment.
For he shall not be moved for ever; the righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance.
He shall not be afraid of any evil report: his heart is ready to trust in the Lord.
His heart is established, he shall not fear, till he shall see his desire upon his enemies.
He has dispersed abroad; he has given to the poor; his righteousness endures for evermore: his horn shall be exalted with honour.
The sinner shall see and be angry, he shall gnash his teeth, and consume away: the desire of the sinner shall perish.
Hearken, O God, to my prayer; and disregard not my supplication.
Attend to me, and hearken to me: I was grieved in my meditation, and troubled;
because of the voice of the enemy, and because of the oppression of the sinner: for they brought iniquity against me, and were wrathfully angry with me.
My heart was troubled within me; and the fear of death fell upon me.
Fear and trembling came upon me, and darkness covered me.
And I said, O that I had wings as those of a dove! then would I flee away, and be at rest.
Lo! I have fled afar off, and lodged in the wilderness. Pause.
I waited for him that should deliver me from distress of spirit and tempest.
Destroy, O Lord, and divide their tongues: for I have seen iniquity and gain saying in the city.
Day and night he shall go round about it upon its walls: iniquity and sorrow and unrighteousness are in the midst of it;
and usury and craft have not failed from its streets.
For if an enemy had reproached me, I would have endured it; and if one who hated me had spoken vauntingly against me, I would have hid myself from him.
But thou, O man like minded, my guide, and my acquaintance,
who in companionship with me sweetened our food: we walked in the house of God in concord.
Let death come upon them, and let them go down alive into Hades, for iniquity is in their dwellings, in the midst of them.
I cried to God, and the Lord hearkened to me.
Evening, and morning, and at noon I will declare and make known my wants: and he shall hear my voice.
He shall deliver my soul in peace from them that draw nigh to me: for they were with me in many cases.
God shall hear, and bring them low, even he that has existed from eternity. Pause. For they suffer no reverse, and therefore they have not feared God.
He has reached forth his hand for retribution; they have profaned his covenant.
They were scattered at the anger of his countenance, and his heart drew nigh them. His words were smoother than oil, yet are they darts.
Cast thy care upon the Lord, and he shall sustain thee; he shall never suffer the righteous to be moved.
But thou, O God, shalt bring them down to the pit of destruction; bloody and crafty men shall not live out half their days; but I will hope in thee, O Lord.
He that revengeth shall find vengeance from the Lord, and he will surely keep his sins in remembrance.
Forgive thy neighbour the hurt that he hath done unto thee, so shall thy sins also be forgiven when thou prayest.
One man beareth hatred against another, and doth he seek pardon from the Lord?
He sheweth no mercy to a man, which is like himself: and doth he ask forgiveness of his own sins?
If he that is but flesh nourish hatred, who will intreat for pardon of his sins?
Remember thy end, and let enmity cease; remember corruption and death, and abide in the commandments.
Remember the commandments, and bear no malice to thy neighbour: remember the covenant of the Highest, and wink at ignorance.
Abstain from strife, and thou shalt diminish thy sins: for a furious man will kindle strife,
A sinful man disquieteth friends, and maketh debate among them that be at peace.
As the matter of the fire is, so it burneth: and as a man's strength is, so is his wrath; and according to his riches his anger riseth; and the stronger they are which contend, the more they will be inflamed.
An hasty contention kindleth a fire: and an hasty fighting sheddeth blood.
If thou blow the spark, it shall burn: if thou spit upon it, it shall be quenched: and both these come out of thy mouth.
Curse the whisperer and doubletongued: for such have destroyed many that were at peace.
A backbiting tongue hath disquieted many, and driven them from nation to nation: strong cities hath it pulled down, and overthrown the houses of great men.
A backbiting tongue hath cast out virtuous women, and deprived them of their labours.
Whoso hearkeneth unto it shall never find rest, and never dwell quietly.
The stroke of the whip maketh marks in the flesh: but the stroke of the tongue breaketh the bones.
Many have fallen by the edge of the sword: but not so many as have fallen by the tongue.
Well is he that is defended through the venom thereof; who hath not drawn the yoke thereof, nor hath been bound in her bands.
For the yoke thereof is a yoke of iron, and the bands thereof are bands of brass.
The death thereof is an evil death, the grave were better than it.
It shall not have rule over them that fear God, neither shall they be burned with the flame thereof.
Such as forsake the Lord shall fall into it; and it shall burn in them, and not be quenched; it shall be sent upon them as a lion, and devour them as a leopard.
Look that thou hedge thy possession about with thorns, and bind up thy silver and gold,
And weigh thy words in a balance, and make a door and bar for thy mouth.
Beware thou slide not by it, lest thou fall before him that lieth in wait.
What shall we do for wives for the rest that remain? whereas we have sworn by the Lord, not to give them of our daughters for wives.
And they said, What one man is there of the tribes of Israel, who went not up to the Lord to Massephath? and, behold, no man came to the camp from Jabis Galaad to the assembly.
And the people were numbered, and there was not there a man from the inhabitants of Jabis Galaad.
And the congregation sent thither twelve thousand men of the strongest, and they charged them, saying, Go ye and smite the inhabitants of Jabis Galaad with the edge of the sword.
And this shall ye do: every male and every woman that has known the lying with man ye shall devote to destruction, but the virgins ye shall save alive: and they did so.
And they found among the inhabitants of Jabis Galaad four hundred young virgins, who had not known man by lying with him; and they brought them to Selom in the land of Chanaan.
And all the congregation sent and spoke to the children of Benjamin in the rock Remmon, and invited them to make peace.
And Benjamin returned to the children of Israel at that time, and the children of Israel gave them the women whom they had save alive of the daughters of Jabis Galaad; and they were content.
Now Jericho was closely shut up and besieged, and none went out of it, and none came in.
And the Lord said to Joshua, Behold, I deliver Jericho into thy power, and its king in it, and its mighty men.
And do thou set the men of war round about it.
And it shall be that when ye shall sound with the trumpet, all the people shall shout together.
And when they have shouted, the walls of the city shall fall of themselves; and all the people shall enter, each one rushing direct into the city.
And Joshua the son of Naue went in to the priests, and spoke to them, saying,
And let seven priests having seven sacred trumpets proceed thus before the Lord, and let them sound loudly; and let the ark of the covenant of the Lord follow.
Charge the people to go round, and encompass the city; and let your men of war pass on armed before the Lord.
And let the men of war proceed before, and the priests bringing up the rear behind the ark of the covenant of the Lord proceed sounding the trumpets.
And Joshua commanded the people, saying, Cry not out, nor let any one hear your voice, until he himself declare to you the time to cry out, and then ye shall cry out.
And the ark of the covenant of God having gone round immediately returned into the camp, and lodged there.
And on the second day Joshua rose up in the morning, and the priests took up the ark of the covenant of the Lord.
And the seven priests bearing the seven trumpets went on before the Lord; and afterwards the men of war went on, and the remainder of the multitude went after the ark of the covenant of the Lord, and the priests sounded with the trumpets.
And all the rest of the multitude compassed the city six times from within a short distance, and went back again into the camp; this they did six days.
And on the seventh day they rose up early, and compassed the city on that day seven times.
And it came to pass at the seventh circuit the priests blew the trumpets; and Joshua said to the children of Israel, Shout, for the Lord has given you the city.
And the city shall be devoted, it and all things that are in it, to the Lord of Hosts: only do ye save Raab the harlot, and all things in her house.
But keep yourselves strictly from the accursed thing, lest ye set your mind upon and take of the accursed thing, and ye make the camp of the children of Israel and accursed thing, and destroy us.
And all the silver, or gold, or brass, or iron, shall be holy to the Lord; it shall be carried into the treasury of the Lord.
And the priests sounded with the trumpets: and when the people heard the trumpets, all the people shouted at once with a loud and strong shout; and all the wall fell round about, and all the people went up into the city:
and Joshua devoted it to destruction, and all things that were in the city, man and woman, young man and old, and calf and ass, with the edge of the sword.
And Joshua said to the two young men who had acted a spies, Go into the house of the woman, and bring her out thence, and all that she has.
And the two young men who had spied out the city entered into the house of the woman, and brought out Raab the harlot, and her father, and her mother, and her brethren, and her kindred, and all that she had; and they set her without the camp of Israel.
And the city was burnt with fire with all things that were in it; only of the silver, and gold, and brass, and iron, they gave to be brought into the treasury of the Lord.
And Joshua saved alive Raab the harlot, and all the house of her father, and caused her to dwell in Israel until this day, because she hid the spies which Joshua sent to spy out Jericho.
And Joshua adjured them on that day before the Lord, saying, Cursed be the man who shall build that city: he shall lay the foundation of it in his first-born, and he shall set up the gates of it in his youngest son. And so did Hozan of Baethel; he laid the foundation in Abiron his first-born, and set up the gates of it in his youngest surviving son.
And the Lord was with Joshua, and his name was in all the land.
Now the Lord had commanded a great whale to swallow up Jonas: and Jonas was in the belly of the whale three days and three nights.
And Jonas prayed to the Lord his God out of the belly of the whale,
and said, I cried in my affliction to the Lord my God, and he hearkened to me, even to my cry out of the belly of hell: thou heardest my voice.
Thou didst cast me into the depths of the heart of the sea, and the floods compassed me: all thy billows and thy waves have passed upon me.
And I said, I am cast out of thy presence: shall I indeed look again toward thy holy temple?
Water was poured around me to the soul: the lowest deep compassed me, my head went down
to the clefts of the mountains; I went down into the earth, whose bars are the everlasting barriers: yet, O Lord my God, let my ruined life be restored.
When my soul was failing me, I remembered the Lord; and may my prayer come to thee into thy holy temple.
They that observe vanities and lies have forsaken their own mercy.
But I will sacrifice to thee with the voice of praise and thanksgiving: all that I have vowed I will pay to thee, the Lord of my salvation.
And the whale was commanded by the Lord, and it cast up Jonas on the dry land.
O God, my heart is ready, my heart is ready; I will sing and sing psalms with my glory.
Awake, psaltery and harp; I will awake early.
I will give thanks to thee, O Lord, among the people; I will sing praise to thee among the Gentiles.
For thy mercy is great above the heavens, and thy truth reaches to the clouds.
Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens; and thy glory above all the earth.
That thy beloved ones may be delivered, save with thy right hand, and hear me. God has spoken in his sanctuary;
I will be exalted, and will divide Sicima, and will measure out the valley of tents.
Galaad is mine; and Manasses is mine; and Ephraim is the help of mine head; Judas is my king;
Moab is the caldron of my hope; over Idumea will I cast my sandal; the Philistines are made subject to me.
Who will bring me into the fortified city? or who will guide me to Idumea?
Wilt not thou, O God, who hast rejected us? and wilt not thou, O God, go forth with our hosts?
Give us help from tribulation: for vain is the help of man.
Through God we shall do valiantly; and he will bring to nought our enemies.
The priests, the Levites, even the whole tribe of Levi, shall have no part nor inheritance with Israel; the burnt-offerings of the Lord are their inheritance, they shall eat them.
And they shall have no inheritance among their brethren; the Lord himself is his portion, as he said to him.
And this is the due of the priests in the things coming from the people from those who offer sacrifices, whether it be a calf or a sheep; and thou shalt give the shoulder to the priest, and the cheeks, and the great intestine:
and the first-fruits of thy corn, and of thy wine, and of thine oil; and thou shalt give to him the first-fruits of the fleeces of thy sheep:
because the Lord has chosen him out of all thy tribes, to stand before the Lord thy God, to minister and bless in his name, himself and his sons among the children of Israel.
And if a Levite come from one of the cities of all the children of Israel, where he himself dwells, accordingly as his mind desires, to the place which he shall have chosen,
he shall minister to the name of the Lord his God, as all his brethren the Levites, who stand there present before the Lord thy God.
He shall eat an allotted portion, besides the sale of his hereditary property.
And when thou shalt have entered into the land which the Lord thy God gives thee, thou shalt not learn to do according to the abominations of those nations.
There shall not be found in thee one who purges his son or his daughter with fire, one who uses divination, who deals with omens, and augury,
a sorcerer employing incantation, one who has in him a divining spirit, and observer of signs, questioning the dead.
For every one that does these things is an abomination to the Lord thy God; for because of these abominations the Lord will destroy them from before thy face.
Thou shalt be perfect before the Lord thy God.
For all these nations whose land thou shalt inherit, they will listen to omens and divinations; but the Lord thy God has not permitted thee so to do.
The Lord thy God shall raise up to thee a prophet of thy brethren, like me; him shall ye hear:
according to all things which thou didst desire of the Lord thy God in Choreb in the day of the assembly, saying, We will not again hear the voice of the Lord thy God, and we will not any more see this great fire, and so we shall not die.
And the Lord said to me, They have spoken rightly all that they have said to thee.
I will raise up to them a prophet of their brethren, like thee; and I will put my words in his mouth, and he shall speak to them as I shall command him.
And whatever man shall not hearken to whatsoever words that prophet shall speak in my name, I will take vengeance on him.
But the prophet whosoever shall impiously speak in my name a word which I have not commanded him to speak, and whosoever shall speak in the name of other gods, that prophet shall die.
But if thou shalt say in thine heart, How shall we know the word which the Lord has not spoken?
Whatsoever words that prophet shall speak in the name of the Lord, and they shall not come true, and not come to pass, this is the thing which the Lord has not spoken; that prophet has spoken wickedly: ye shall not spare him.
For, behold, a righteous king shall reign, and princes shall govern with judgment.
And a man shall hide his words, and be hidden, as from rushing water, and shall appear in Sion as a rushing river, glorious in a thirsty land.
And they shall no more trust in men, but they shall incline their ears to hear.
And the heart of the weak ones shall attend to hear, and the stammering tongues shall soon learn to speak peace.
And they shall no more at all tell a fool to rule, and thy servants shall no more at all say, Be silent.
For the fool shall speak foolish words, and his heart shall meditate vanities, and to perform lawless deeds and to speak error against the Lord, to scatter hungry souls, and he will cause the thirsty souls to be empty.
For the counsel of the wicked will devise iniquity, to destroy the poor with unjust words, and ruin the cause of the poor in judgment.
But the godly have devised wise measures, and this counsel shall stand.
Rise up, ye rich women, and hear my voice; ye confident daughters, hearken to my words.
Remember for a full year in pain, yet with hope: the vintage has been cut off; it has ceased, it shall by no means come again.
Be amazed, be pained, ye confident ones: strip you, bare yourselves, gird your loins;
and beat your breasts, because of the pleasant field, and the fruit of the vine.
As for the land of my people, the thorn and grass shall come upon it, and joy shall be removed from every house.
As for the rich city, the houses are deserted; they shall abandon the wealth of the city, and the pleasant houses: and the villages shall be caves for ever, the joy of wild asses, shepherds' pastures;
until the Spirit shall come upon you from on high, and Chermel shall be desert, and Chermel shall be counted for a forest.
Then judgment shall abide in the wilderness, and righteousness shall dwell in Carmel.
And the works of righteousness shall be peace; and righteousness shall ensure rest, and the righteous shall be confident for ever.
And his people shall inhabit a city of peace, and dwell in it in confidence, and they shall rest with wealth.
And if the hail should come down, it shall not come upon you; and they that dwell in the forests shall be in confidence, as those in the plain country.
Blessed are they that sow by every water, where the ox and ass tread.
Babylon has been a golden cup in the Lord's hand, causing all the earth to be drunken: the nations have drunk of her wine; therefore they were shaken.
And Babylon is fallen suddenly, and is broken to pieces: lament for her; take balm for her deadly wound, if by any means she may be healed.
We tried to heal Babylon, but she was not healed: let us forsake her, and depart every one to his own country: for her judgment has reached to the heaven, it has mounted up to the stars.
And by thee I will scatter the horse and his rider; and by thee I will scatter chariots and them that ride in them.
And by thee I will scatter youth and maid; and by thee I will scatter man and woman.
And by thee I will scatter the shepherd and his flock; and by thee I will scatter the husbandman and his husbandry; and by thee I will scatter leaders and the captains.
And I will recompense to Babylon and to all the Chaldeans that dwell there all their mischiefs that they have done to Sion before your eyes, saith the Lord.
Behold, I am against thee, the ruined mountain, that destroys the whole earth; and I will stretch out mine hand upon thee, and will roll thee down upon the rocks, and will make thee as a burnt mountain.
And they shall not take from thee a stone for a corner, nor a stone for a foundation: for thou shalt be a desolation for ever, saith the Lord.
Lift up a standard in the land, sound the trumpet among the nations, consecrate the nations against her, raise up kings against her by me, and that for the people of Achanaz; set against her engines of war; bring up against her horses as a multitude of locusts.
Bring up nations against her, even the king of the Medes and of the whole earth, his rulers, and all his captains.
The earth has quaked and been troubled, because the purpose of the Lord has risen up against Babylon, to make the land of Babylon a desolation, and uninhabitable.
Go forth of the land, ye that escape, and stay not; ye that are afar off, remember the Lord, and let Jerusalem come into your mind.
THE WORD WHICH THE LORD COMMANDED THE PROPHET JEREMIAS to say to Saraeas son of Nerias, son of Maasaeas, when he went from Sedekias king of Juda to Babylon, in the fourth year of his reign. And Saraeas was over the bounties.
And Jeremias wrote in a book all the evils which should come upon Babylon, even all these words that are written against Babylon.
And Jeremias said to Saraeas, When thou art come to Babylon, and shalt see and read all these words;
then thou shalt say, O Lord God, thou hast spoken against this place, to destroy it, and that there should be none to dwell in it, neither man nor beast; for it shall be a desolation for ever.
And it shall come to pass, when thou shalt cease from reading this book, that thou shalt bind a stone upon it, and cast it into the midst of Euphrates;
and shalt say, Thus shall Babylon sink, and not rise, because of the evils which I bring upon it.
Judge me, O God, and plead my cause, against an ungodly nation: deliver me from the unjust and crafty man.
For thou, O God, art my strength: wherefore hast thou cast me off? and why do I go sad of countenance, while the enemy oppresses me?
Send forth thy light and thy truth: they have led me, and brought me to thy holy mountain, and to thy tabernacles.
And I will go in to the altar of God, to God who gladdens my youth: I will give thanks to thee on the harp, O God, my God.
Wherefore art thou very sad, O my soul? and wherefore dost thou trouble me? Hope in God; for I will give thanks to him, who is the health of my countenance, and my God.
This is the book of the commandments of God, and the law that endureth for ever: all they that keep it shall come to life; but such as leave it shall die.
Turn thee, O Jacob, and take hold of it: walk in the presence of the light thereof, that thou mayest be illuminated.
Give not thine honour to another, nor the things that are profitable unto thee to a strange nation.
O Israel, happy are we: for things that are pleasing to God are made known unto us.
Be of good cheer, my people, the memorial of Israel.
Ye were sold to the nations, not for your destruction: but because ye moved God to wrath, ye were delivered unto the enemies.
For ye provoked him that made you by sacrificing unto devils, and not to God.
Ye have forgotten the everlasting God, that brought you up; and ye have grieved Jerusalem, that nursed you.
For when she saw the wrath of God coming upon you, she said, Hearken, O ye that dwell about Sion: God hath brought upon me great mourning;
For I saw the captivity of my sons and daughters, which the Everlasting brought upon them.
With joy did I nourish them; but sent them away with weeping and mourning.
Let no man rejoice over me, a widow, and forsaken of many, who for the sins of my children am left desolate; because they departed from the law of God.
They knew not his statutes, nor walked in the ways of his commandments, nor trod in the paths of discipline in his righteousness.
Let them that dwell about Sion come, and remember ye the captivity of my sons and daughters, which the Everlasting hath brought upon them.
For he hath brought a nation upon them from far, a shameless nation, and of a strange language, who neither reverenced old man, nor pitied child.
These have carried away the dear beloved children of the widow, and left her that was alone desolate without daughters.
But what can I help you?
For he that brought these plagues upon you will deliver you from the hands of your enemies.
Go your way, O my children, go your way: for I am left desolate.
I have put off the clothing of peace, and put upon me the sackcloth of my prayer: I will cry unto the Everlasting in my days.
Be of good cheer, O my children, cry unto the Lord, and he will deliver you from the power and hand of the enemies.
For my hope is in the Everlasting, that he will save you; and joy is come unto me from the Holy One, because of the mercy which shall soon come unto you from the Everlasting our Saviour.
For I sent you out with mourning and weeping: but God will give you to me again with joy and gladness for ever.
Like as now the neighbours of Sion have seen your captivity: so shall they see shortly your salvation from our God which shall come upon you with great glory, and brightness of the Everlasting.
My children, suffer patiently the wrath that is come upon you from God: for thine enemy hath persecuted thee; but shortly thou shalt see his destruction, and shalt tread upon his neck.
My delicate ones have gone rough ways, and were taken away as a flock caught of the enemies.
Be of good comfort, O my children, and cry unto God: for ye shall be remembered of him that brought these things upon you.
For as it was your mind to go astray from God: so, being returned, seek him ten times more.
For he that hath brought these plagues upon you shall bring you everlasting joy with your salvation.
Take a good heart, O Jerusalem: for he that gave thee that name will comfort thee.
Miserable are they that afflicted thee, and rejoiced at thy fall.
Miserable are the cities which thy children served: miserable is she that received thy sons.
For as she rejoiced at thy ruin, and was glad of thy fall: so shall she be grieved for her own desolation.
For I will take away the rejoicing of her great multitude, and her pride shall be turned into mourning.
For fire shall come upon her from the Everlasting, long to endure; and she shall be inhabited of devils for a great time.
O Jerusalem, look about thee toward the east, and behold the joy that cometh unto thee from God.
Lo, thy sons come, whom thou sentest away, they come gathered together from the east to the west by the word of the Holy One, rejoicing in the glory of God.
And Jacob heard the words of the sons of Laban, saying, Jacob has taken all that was our father's, and of our father's property has he gotten all this glory.
And the Lord said to Jacob, Return to the land of thy father, and to thy family, and I will be with thee.
And Jacob sent and called Lea and Rachel to the plain where the flocks were.
And he said to them, I see the face of your father, that it is not toward me as before, but the God of my father was with me.
And ye too know that with all my might I have served your father.
So God has taken away all the cattle of your father, and given them to me.
And it came to pass when the cattle conceived and were with young, that I beheld with mine eyes in sleep, and behold the he-goats and the rams leaping on the sheep and the she-goats, speckled and variegated and spotted with ash-coloured spots.
And the angel of God said to me in a dream, Jacob; and I said, What is it?
And he said, Look up with thine eyes, and behold the he-goats and the rams leaping on the sheep and the she-goats, speckled and variegated and spotted with ash-coloured spots; for I have seen all things that Laban does to thee.
And Laban said to Jacob, What hast thou done? wherefore didst thou run away secretly, and pillage me, and lead away my daughters as captives taken with the sword?
Whereas if thou hadst told me, I would have sent thee away with mirth, and with songs, and timbrels, and harp.
And I was not counted worthy to embrace my children and my daughters; now then thou hast wrought foolishly.
And now my hand has power to hurt thee; but the God of thy father spoke to me yesterday, saying, Take heed to thyself that thou speak not evil words to Jacob.
And Jacob said, With whomsoever thou shalt find thy gods, he shall not live in the presence of our brethren; take notice of what I have of thy property, and take it; and he observed nothing with him, but Jacob knew not that his wife Rachel had stolen them.
And Laban went in and searched in the house of Lea, and found not; and he went out of the house of Lea, and searched in the house of Jacob, and in the house of the two maid-servants, and found them not; and he went also into the house of Rachel.
And Jacob having taken a stone, set it up for a pillar.
And Jacob said to his brethren, Gather stones; and they gathered stones and made a heap, and ate there upon the heap; and Laban said to him, This heap witnesses between me and thee to-day.
And Laban called it, the Heap of Testimony; and Jacob called it, the Witness Heap.
And the vision of which he saidLet God look to it between me and thee, because we are about to depart from each other,
If thou shalt humble my daughters, if thou shouldest take wives in addition to my daughters, see, there is no one with us looking on. God witness between me and thee.
The God of Abraam and the God of Nachor judge between us; and Jacob swore by the Fear of his father Isaac.
A reprover is better than a stiff-necked man: for when the latter is suddenly set on fire, there shall be no remedy.
When the righteous are praised, the people will rejoice: but when the ungodly rule, men mourn.
When a man loves wisdom, his father rejoices: but he that keeps harlots will waste wealth.
A righteous king establishes a country: but a transgressor destroys it.
He that prepares a net in the way of his own friend, entangles his own feet in it.
A great snare is spread for a sinner: but the righteous shall be in joy and gladness.
A righteous man knows how to judge for the poor: but the ungodly understands not knowledge; and the poor man has not an understanding mind.
Lawless men burn down a city: but wise men turn away wrath.
A wise man shall judge nations: but a worthless man being angry laughs and fears not.
Bloody men hate a holy person, but the upright will seek his soul.
A fool utters all is mind: but the wise reserves his in part.
When a king hearkens to unjust language, all his subjects are transgressors.
When the creditor and debtor meet together, the Lord oversees them both.
When a king judges the poor in truth, his throne shall be established for a testimony.
Stripes and reproofs give wisdom: but an erring child disgraces his parents.
When the ungodly abound, sins abound: but when they fall, the righteous are warned.
Chasten thy son, and he shall give thee rest; and he shall give honour to thy soul.
There shall be no interpreter to a sinful nation: but he that observes the law is blessed.
A stubborn servant will not be reproved by words: for even if he understands, still he will not obey.
If thou see a man hasty in his words, know that the fool has hope rather than he.
He that lives wantonly from a child, shall be a servant, and in the end shall grieve over himself.
A furious man stirs up strife, and a passionate man digs up sin.
Pride brings a man low, but the Lord upholds the humble-minded with honour.
He that shares with a thief, hates his own soul: and if any having heard an oath uttered tell not of it,
they fearing and reverencing men unreasonably have been overthrown, but he that trusts in the Lord shall rejoice. Ungodliness causes a man to stumble: but he that trusts in his master shall be safe.
Many wait on the favour of rulers; but justice comes to a man from the Lord.
A righteous man is an abomination to an unrighteous man, and the direct way is an abomination to the sinner.
I became manifest to them that asked not for me; I was found of them that sought me not: I said, Behold, I am here, to a nation, who called not on my name.
I have stretched forth my hands all day to a disobedient and gainsaying people, to them that walked in a way that was not good, but after their sins.
This is the people that provokes me continually in my presence; they offer sacrifices in gardens, and burn incense on bricks to devils, which exist not.
They lie down to sleep in the tombs and in the caves for the sake of dreams, even they that eat swine's flesh, and the broth of their sacrifices: all their vessels are defiled:
who say, Depart from me, draw not nigh to me, for I am pure. This is the smoke of my wrath, a fire burns with it continually.
Behold, it is written before me: I will not be silent until I have recompensed into their bosom,
their sins and the sins of their fathers, saith the Lord, who have burnt incense on the mountains, and reproached me on the hills: I will recompense their works into their bosom.
Thus saith the Lord, As a grape-stone shall be found in the cluster, and they shall say, Destroy it not; for a blessing is in it: so will I do for the sake of him that serves me, for his sake I will not destroy them all.
And I will lead forth the seed that came of Jacob and of Juda, and they shall inherit my holy mountain: and mine elect and my servants shall inherit it, and shall dwell there.
And there shall be in the forest folds of flocks, and the valley of Achor shall be for a resting-place of herds for my people, who have sought me.
But ye are they that have left me, and forget my holy mountain, and prepare a table for the devil, and fill up the drink-offering to Fortune.
I will deliver you up to the sword, ye shall all fall by slaughter: for I called you, and ye hearkened not; I spoke, and ye refused to hear; and ye did evil in my sight, and chose the things wherein I delighted not.
Therefore thus saith the Lord, Behold, my servants shall eat, but ye shall hunger: behold, my servants shall drink, but ye shall thirst: behold, my servants shall rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed:
behold, my servants shall exult with joy, but ye shall cry for the sorrow of your heart, and shall howl for the vexation of your spirit.
For ye shall leave your name for a loathing to my chosen, and the Lord shall destroy you: but my servants shall be called by a new name,
which shall be blessed on the earth; for they shall bless the true God: and they that swear upon the earth shall swear by the true God; for they shall forget the former affliction, it shall not come into their mind.
For there shall be a new heaven and a new earth: and they shall not at all remember the former, neither shall they at all come into their mind.
But they shall find in her joy and exultation; for, behold, I make Jerusalem a rejoicing, and my people a joy.
And I will rejoice in Jerusalem, and will be glad in my people: and there shall no more be heard in her the voice of weeping, or the voice of crying.
Neither shall there be there any more a child that dies untimely, or an old man who shall not complete his time: for the youth shall be a hundred years old, and the sinner who dies at a hundred years shall also be accursed:
and they shall build houses, and themselves shall dwell in them; and they shall plant vineyards, and themselves shall eat the fruit thereof.
They shall by no means build, and others inhabit; and they shall by no means plant, and others eat: for as the days of the tree of life shall be the days of my people, they shall long enjoy the fruits of their labours.
My chosen shall not toil in vain, neither shall they beget children to be cursed; for they are a seed blessed of God, and their offspring with them.
And it shall come to pass, that before they call, I will hearken to them; while they are yet speaking, I will say, What is it?
Then wolves and lambs shall feed together, and the lion shall eat chaff like the ox, and the serpent earth as bread. They shall not injure nor destroy in my holy mountain, saith the Lord.
Praise God in his holy places: praise him in the firmament of his power.
Praise him on account of his mighty acts: praise him according to his abundant greatness.
Praise him with the sound of a trumpet: praise him with psaltery and harp.
Praise him with timbrel and dance: praise him with stringed instruments and the organ.
Praise him with melodious cymbals: praise him with loud cymbals.
Let every thing that has breath praise the Lord.
And the Lord said to Moses, Go forward, go up hence, thou and thy people, whom thou broughtest out of the land of Egypt, into the land which I swore to Abraam, and Isaac, and Jacob, saying, I will give it to your seed.
And I will send at the same time my angel before thy face, and he shall cast out the Amorite and the Chettite, and the Pherezite and Gergesite, and Evite, and Jebusite, and Chananite.
And I will bring thee into a land flowing with milk and honey; for I will not go up with thee, because thou art a stiff-necked people, lest I consume thee by the way.
And the people having heard this grievous saying, mourned in mourning apparel.
For the Lord said to the children of Israel, Ye are a stiff-necked people; take heed lest I bring on you another plague, and destroy you: now then put off your glorious apparel, and your ornaments, and I will shew thee what I will do to thee.
So the sons of Israel took off their ornaments and their array at the mount of Choreb.
And Moses took his tabernacle and pitched it without the camp, at a distance from the camp; and it was called the Tabernacle of Testimony: and it came to pass that every one that sought the Lord went forth to the tabernacle which was without the camp.
And whenever Moses went into the tabernacle without the camp, all the people stood every one watching by the doors of his tent; and when Moses departed, they took notice until he entered into the tabernacle.
And when Moses entered into the tabernacle, the pillar of the cloud descended, and stood at the door of the tabernacle, and God talked to Moses.
And all the people saw the pillar of the cloud standing by the door of the tabernacle, and all the people stood and worshipped every one at the door of his tent.
And the Lord spoke to Moses face to face, as if one should speak to his friend; and he retired into the camp: but his servant Joshua the son of Naue, a young man, departed not forth from the tabernacle.
And Moses said to the Lord, Lo! thou sayest to me, Lead on this people; but thou hast not shewed me whom thou wilt send with me, but thou hast said to me, I know thee above all, and thou hast favour with me.
If then I have found favour in thy sight, reveal thyself to me, that I may evidently see thee; that I may find favour in thy sight, and that I may know that this great nation is thy people.
And he says, I myself will go before thee, and give thee rest.
And he says to him, If thou go not up with us thyself, bring me not up hence.
And how shall it be surely known, that both I and this people have found favour with thee, except only if thou go with us? So both I and thy people shall be glorified beyond all the nations, as many as are upon the earth.
And the Lord said to Moses, I will also do for thee this thing, which thou hast spoken; for thou hast found grace before me, and I know thee above all.
And Moses says, Manifest thyself to me.
And God said, I will pass by before thee with my glory, and I will call by my name, the Lord, before thee; and I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and will have pity on whom I will have pity.
And God said, Thou shalt not be able to see my face; for no man shall see my face, and live.
And the Lord said, Behold, there is a place by me: thou shalt stand upon the rock;
and when my glory shall pass by, then I will put thee into a hole of the rock; and I will cover thee over with my hand, until I shall have passed by.
And I will remove my hand, and then shalt thou see my back parts; but my face shall not appear to thee.
Keep me, O Lord; for I have hoped in thee.
I said to the Lord, Thou art my Lord; for thou has no need of my goodness.
On behalf of the saints that are in his land, he has magnified all his pleasure in them.
Their weaknesses have been multiplied; afterward they hasted. I will by no means assemble their bloody meetings, neither will I make mention of their names with my lips.
The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance and of my cup: thou art he that restores my inheritance to me.
The lines have fallen to me in the best places, yea, I have a most excellent heritage.
I will bless the Lord who has instructed me; my reins too have chastened me even till night.
I foresaw the Lord always before my face; for he is on my right hand, that I should not be moved.
Therefore my heart rejoiced an my tongue exulted; moreover also my flesh shall rest in hope:
because thou wilt not leave my soul in hell, neither wilt thou suffer thine Holy One to see corruption.
Thou hast made known to me the ways of life; thou wilt fill me with joy with thy countenance: at thy right hand there are delights for ever.
And Samuel took a vial of oil, and poured it on his head, and kissed him, and said to him, Has not the Lord anointed thee for a ruler over his people, over Israel? and thou shalt rule among the people of the Lord, and thou shalt save them out of the hand of their enemies; and this shall be the sign to thee that the Lord has anointed thee for a ruler over his inheritance.
As soon as thou shalt have departed this day from me, thou shalt find two men by the burial-place of Rachel on the mount of Benjamin, exulting greatly; and they shall say to thee, The asses are found which ye went to seek; and, behold, thy father has given up the matter of the asses, and he is anxious for you, saying, What shall I do for my son?
And thou shalt depart thence, and shalt go beyond that as far as the oak of Thabor, and thou shalt find there three men going up to God to Baethel, one bearing three kids, and another bearing three vessels of bread, and another bearing a bottle of wine.
And they shall ask thee how thou doest, and shall give thee two presents of bread, and thou shall receive them of their hand.
And afterward thou shalt go to the hill of God, where is the encampment of the Philistines; there is Nasib the Philistine: an it shall come to pass when ye shall have entered into the city, that thou shalt meet a band of prophets coming down from the Bama; and before them will be lutes, and a drum, and a pipe, and a harp, and they shall prophesy.
And the Spirit of the Lord shall come upon thee, and thou shalt prophesy with them, and shalt be turned into another man.
And it shall come to pass when these signs shall come upon thee, then do thou whatsoever thy hand shall find, because God is with thee.
And thou shalt go down in front of Galgal, and behold, I come down to thee to offer a whole-burnt-offering and peace-offerings: seven days shalt thou wait until I shall come to thee, and I will make known to thee what thou shalt do.
And it came to pass when he turned his back to depart from Samuel, God gave him another heart; and all these signs came to pass in that day.
And he comes thence to the hill, and behold a band of prophets opposite to him; and the Spirit of God came upon him, and he prophesied in the midst of them.
And all that had known him before came, and saw, and behold, he was in the midst of the prophets: and the people said every one to his neighbour, What is this that has happened to the son of Kis? is Saul also among the prophets?
And one of them answered and said, And who is his father? and therefore it became a proverb, Is Saul also among the prophets?
And he ceased prophesying, and comes to the hill.
And his kinsman said to him and to his servant, Whither went ye? and they said, To seek the asses; and we saw that they were lost, and we went in to Samuel.
And his kinsman said to Saul, Tell me, I pray thee, What did Samuel say to thee?
And Saul said to his kinsman, he verily told me that the asses were found. But the matter of the kingdom he told him not.
And Samuel summoned all the people before the Lord to Massephath.
And he said to the children of Israel, Thus has the Lord God of Israel spoken, saying, I brought up the children of Israel out of Egypt, and I rescued you out of the hand of Pharao king of Egypt, and out of all the kingdoms that afflicted you.
And ye have this day rejected God, who is himself your Deliverer out of all your evils and afflictions; and ye said, Nay, but thou shalt set a king over us: and now stand before the Lord according to your tribes, and according to your families.
And Samuel brought nigh all the tribes of Israel, and the tribe of Benjamin is taken by lot.
And he brings near the tribe of Benjamin by families, and the family of Mattari is taken by lot: and they bring near the family of Mattari, man by man, and Saul the son of Kis is taken; and he sought him, but he was not found.
And Samuel asked yet again of the Lord, Will the man come hither? and the Lord said, Behold, he is hid among the stuff.
And he ran and took him thence, and he set him in the midst of the people; and he was higher than all the people by his shoulders and upwards.
And Samuel said to all the people, Have ye seen whom the Lord has chosen to himself, that there is none like to him among you all? And all the people took notice, and said, Let the king live!
And Samuel told the people the manner of the king, and wrote it in a book, and set it before the Lord: and Samuel sent away all the people, and each went to his place.
And Saul departed to his house to Gabaa; and there went with Saul mighty men whose hearts God had touched.
But evil men said, Who is this man that shall save us? and they despised him, and brought him no gifts.
And Job answered and said,
So then ye alone are men, and wisdom shall die with you?
But I also have a heart as well as you.
For a righteous and blameless man has become a subject for mockery.
For it had been ordained that he should fall under others at the appointed time, and that his houses should be spoiled by transgressors: let not however any one trust that, being evil, he shall be held guiltless,
even as many as provoke the Lord, as if there were indeed to be no inquisition made of them.
But ask now the beasts, if they may speak to thee; and the birds of the air, if they may declare to thee.
Tell the earth, if it may speak to thee: and the fishes of the sea shall explain to thee.
Whereas the life of all living things is in his hand, and the breath of every man.
For the ear tries words, and the palate tastes meats.
In length of time is wisdom, and in long life knowledge.
With him are wisdom and power, with him counsel and understanding.
If he should cast down, who will build up? if he should shut up against man, who shall open?
If he should withhold the water, he will dry the earth: and if he should let it loose, he overthrows and destroys it.
With him are strength and power: he has knowledge and understanding.
He leads counsellors away captive, and maddens the judges of the earth.
He seats kings upon thrones, and girds their loins with a girdle.
He sends away priests into captivity, and overthrows the mighty ones of the earth.
He pours dishonour upon princes, and heals the lowly.
Revealing deep things out of darkness: and he has brought into light the shadow of death.
Perplexing the minds of the princes of the earth: and he causes them to wander in a way, they have not known, saying,
Let them grope in darkness, and let there be no light, and let them wander as a drunken man.
And the two sons of Aaron, Nadab and Abiud, took each his censer, and put fire therein, and threw incense thereon, and offered strange fire before the Lord, which the Lord did not command them,
and fire came forth from the Lord, and devoured them, and they died before the Lord.
And Moses said to Aaron, This is the thing which the Lord spoke, saying, I will be sanctified among them that draw night to me, and I will be glorified in the whole congregation; and Aaron was pricked in his heart.
And Moses called Misadae, and Elisaphan, sons of Oziel, sons of the brother of Aaron's father, and said to them, Draw near and take your brethren from before the sanctuary out of the camp.
And they came near and took them in their coats out of the camp, as Moses said.
And Moses said to Aaron, and Eleazar and Ithamar his sons that were left, Ye shall not make bare your heads, and ye shall not tear your garments; that ye die not, and so there should be wrath on all the congregation: but your brethren, even all the house of Israel, shall lament for the burning, with which they were burnt by the Lord.
And ye shall not go forth from the door of the tabernacle of witness, that ye die not; for the Lord's anointing oil is upon you: and they did according to the word of Moses.
And the Lord spoke to Aaron, saying,
Ye shall not drink wine nor strong drink, thou and thy sons with thee, whensoever ye enter into the tabernacle of witness, or when ye approach the altar, so shall ye not die; it is a perpetual statute for your generations,
to distinguish between sacred and profane, and between clean and unclean,
and to teach the children of Israel all the statutes, which the Lord spoke to them by Moses.
And Moses said to Aaron, and to Eleazar and Ithamar, the sons of Aaron who survived, Take the sacrifice that is left of the burnt-offerings of the Lord, and ye shall eat unleavened bread by the altar: it is most holy.
And ye shall eat it in the holy place; for this is a statute for thee and a statute for thy sons, of the burnt-offerings to the Lord; for so it has been commanded me.
And ye shall eat the breast of separation, and the shoulder of the choice-offering in the holy place, thou and thy sons and thy house with thee; for it has been given as an ordinance for thee and an ordinance for thy sons, of the sacrifices of peace-offering of the children of Israel.
They shall bring the shoulder of the choice-offering, and the breast of the separation upon the burnt-offerings of the fat, to separate for a separation before the Lord; and it shall be a perpetual ordinance for thee and thy sons and thy daughters with thee, as the Lord commanded Moses.
And Moses diligently sought the goat of the sin-offering, but it had been consumed by fire; and Moses was angry with Eleazar and Ithamar the sons of Aaron that were left, saying,
Why did ye not eat the sin-offering in the holy place? for because it is most holy he has given you this to eat, that ye might take away the sin of the congregation, and make atonement for them before the Lord.
For the blood of it was not brought into the holy place: ye shall eat it within, before the Lord, as the Lord commanded me.
And Aaron spoke to Moses, saying, If they have brought nigh to-day their sin-offerings, and their whole-burnt-offerings before the Lord, and these events have happened to me, and yet I should eat to-day of the sin-offerings, would it be pleasing to the Lord?
And Moses heard it, and it pleased him.
And David said, Is there yet any one left in the house of Saul, that I may deal kindly with him for Jonathan's sake?
And there was a servant of the house of Saul, and his name was Siba: and they call him to David; and the king said to him, Art thou Siba? and he said, I am thy servant.
And the king said, Is there yet a man left of the house of Saul, that I may act towards him with the mercy of God? and Siba said to the king, There is yet a son of Jonathan, lame of his feet.
And the king said, Where is he? and Siba said to the king, Behold, he is in the house of Machir the son of Amiel of Lodabar.
And king David went, and took him out of the house of Machir the son Amiel of Lodabar.
And Memphibosthe the son of Jonathan the son of Saul comes to the king David, and he fell upon his face and did obeisance to him: and David said to him, Memphibosthe: and he said, Behold thy servant.
And David said to him, Fear not, for I will surely deal mercifully with thee for the sake of Jonathan thy father, and I will restore to thee all the land of Saul the father of thy father; and thou shalt eat bread at my table continually.
And Memphibosthe did obeisance, and said, Who am I thy servant, that thou hast looked upon a dead dog like me?
And the king called Siba the servant of Saul, and said to him, All that belonged to Saul and to all his house have I given to the son of thy lord.
And thou, and thy sons, and thy servants, shall till the land for him; and thou shalt bring in bread to the son of thy lord, and he shall eat bread: and Memphibosthe the son of thy lord shall eat bread continually at my table. Now Siba had fifteen sons and twenty servants.
And Siba said to the king, According to all that my lord the king has commanded his servant, so will thy servant do. And Memphibosthe did eat at the table of David, as one of the sons of the king.
And Memphibosthe had a little son, and his name was Micha: and all the household of Siba were servants to Memphibosthe.
And Memphibosthe dwelt in Jerusalem, for he continually ate at the table of the king; and he was lame in both his feet.
ALEPH. I am the man that sees poverty, through the rod of his wrath upon me.
He has taken me, and led me away into darkness, and not into light.
Nay, against me has he turned his hand all the day.
He has made old my flesh and my skin; he has broken my bones.
BETH. He has built against me, and compassed my head, and brought travail upon me.
He has set me in dark places, as them that have long been dead.
He has builded against me, and I cannot come forth: he has made my brazen chain heavy.
GIMEL. Yea, though I cry and shout, he shuts out my prayer.
DALETH. He has built up my ways, he has hedged my paths;
he has troubled me, as a she-bear lying in wait: he is to me as a lion in secret places.
He pursued me after I departed, and brought me to a stand: he has utterly ruined me.
HE. He has bent his bow, and set me as a mark for the arrow.
He has caused the arrows of his quiver to enter into my reins.
I became a laughing-stock to all my people; and their song all the day.
VAU. He has filled me with bitterness, he has drenched me with gall.
And he has dashed out my teeth with gravel, he has fed me with ashes.
He has also removed my soul from peace: I forgot prosperity.
Therefore my success has perished, and my hope from the Lord.
ZAIN. I remembered by reason of my poverty, and because of persecution my bitterness and gall shall be remembered;
and my soul shall meditate with me.
This will I lay up in my heart, therefore I will endure.
HETH. It is the mercies of the Lord, that he has not failed me, because his compassions are not exhausted. Pity us, O Lord, early every month: for we are not brought to an end, because his compassions are not exhausted.
They are new every morning: great is thy faithfulness.
The Lord is my portion, says my soul; therefore will I wait for him.
TETH. The Lord is good to them that wait for him: the soul which shall seek him
is good, and shall wait for, and quietly expect salvation of the Lord.
TETH. It is good for a man when he bears a yoke in his youth.
He will sit alone, and be silent, because he has borne it upon him.
JOD. He will give his cheek to him that smites him: he will be filled full with reproaches.
For the Lord will not reject for ever.
CHAPH. For he that has brought down will pity, and that according to the abundance of his mercy.
He has not answered in anger from his heart, though he has brought low the children of a man.
LAMED. To bring down under his feet all the prisoners of the earth,
to turn aside the judgment of a man before the face of the Most High,
to condemn a man unjustly in his judgment, the Lord has not given commandment.
Who has thus spoken, and it has come to pass? the Lord has not commanded it.
Out of the mouth of the Most High there shall not come forth evil and good.
MEM. Why should a living man complain, a man concerning his sin?
NUN. Our way has been searched out and examined, and we will turn to the Lord.
Let us lift up our hearts with our hand to the lofty One in heaven.
We have sinned, we have transgressed; and thou hast not pardoned.
SAMECH. Thou has visited us in wrath, and driven us away: thou has slain, thou has not pitied.
Thou hast veiled thyself with a cloud because of prayer, that I might be blind,
and be cast off. AIN. Thou hast set us alone in the midst of the nations.
All our enemies have opened their mouth against us.
Fear and wrath are come upon us, suspense and destruction.
Mine eye shall pour down torrents of water, for the destruction of the daughter of my people.
PHE. Mine eye is drowned with tears, and I will not be silent, so that there shall be no rest,
until the Lord look down, and behold from heaven.
Mine eye shall prey upon my soul, because of all the daughters of the city.
TSADE. The fowlers chased me as a sparrow, all mine enemies destroyed my life in a pit without cause,
and laid a stone upon me.
Water flowed over my head: I said, I am cut off.
KOPH. I called upon thy name, O Lord, out of the lowest dungeon.
Thou heardest my voice: close not thine ears to my supplication.
Thou drewest nigh to my help: in the day wherein I called upon thee thou saidst to me, Fear not.
RECHS. O Lord, thou has pleaded the causes of my soul; thou has redeemed my life.
Thou hast seen, O Lord, my troubles: thou hast judged my cause.
Thou hast seen all their vengeance, thou hast looked on all their devices against me.
CHSEN. Thou hast heard their reproach and all their devices against me;
the lips of them that rose up against me, and their plots against me all the day;
their sitting down and their rising up: look thou upon their eyes.
Thou wilt render them a recompense, O Lord, according to the works of their hands.
THAU. Thou wilt give them as a covering, the grief of my heart.
Thou wilt persecute them in anger, and wilt consume them from under the heaven, O Lord.
When thou wilt do good know to whom thou doest it; so shalt thou be thanked for thy benefits.
Do good to the godly man, and thou shalt find a recompence; and if not from him, yet from the most High.
There can no good come to him that is always occupied in evil, nor to him that giveth no alms.
Give to the godly man, and help not a sinner.
Do well unto him that is lowly, but give not to the ungodly: hold back thy bread, and give it not unto him, lest he overmaster thee thereby: for else thou shalt receive twice as much evil for all the good thou shalt have done unto him.
For the most High hateth sinners, and will repay vengeance unto the ungodly, and keepeth them against the mighty day of their punishment.
A friend cannot be known in prosperity: and an enemy cannot be hidden in adversity.
In the prosperity of a man enemies will be grieved: but in his adversity even a friend will depart.
Never trust thine enemy: for like as iron rusteth, so is his wickedness.
Though he humble himself, and go crouching, yet take good heed and beware of him, and thou shalt be unto him as if thou hadst wiped a lookingglass, and thou shalt know that his rust hath not been altogether wiped away.
Set him not by thee, lest, when he hath overthrown thee, he stand up in thy place; neither let him sit at thy right hand, lest he seek to take thy seat, and thou at the last remember my words, and be pricked therewith.
Who will pity a charmer that is bitten with a serpent, or any such as come nigh wild beasts?
So one that goeth to a sinner, and is defiled with him in his sins, who will pity?
For a while he will abide with thee, but if thou begin to fall, he will not tarry.
An enemy speaketh sweetly with his lips, but in his heart he imagineth how to throw thee into a pit: he will weep with his eyes, but if he find opportunity, he will not be satisfied with blood.
If adversity come upon thee, thou shalt find him there first; and though he pretend to help thee, yet shall he undermine thee.
He will shake his head, and clap his hands, and whisper much, and change his countenance.
And it shall come to pass in that day, saith the Lord, that the heart of the king shall perish, and the heart of the princes; and the priests shall be amazed, and the prophets shall wonder.
And I said, O sovereign Lord, verily thou hast deceived this people and Jerusalem, saying, There shall be peace; whereas behold, the sword has reached even to their soul.
At that time they shall say to this people and to Jerusalem, There is a spirit of error in the wilderness: the way of the daughter of my people is not to purity, nor to holiness.
Cleanse thine heart from wickedness, O Jerusalem, that thou mayest be saved: how long will thy grievous thoughts be within thee?
For a voice of one publishing from Dan shall come, and trouble out of mount Ephraim shall be heard of.
Remind ye the nations; behold, they are come: proclaim it in Jerusalem, that bands are approaching from a land afar off, and have uttered their voice against the cities of Juda.
Thy ways and thy devices have brought these things upon thee; this is thy wickedness, for it is bitter, for it has reached to thy heart.
for all the land is distressed: suddenly my tabernacle is distressed, my curtains have been rent asunder.
For the princes of my people have not known me, they are foolish and unwise children: they are wise to do evil, but how to do good they have not known.
I looked upon the earth, and, behold, it was not; and to the sky, an there was no light in it.
I beheld the mountains, and they trembled, and I saw all the hills in commotion.
I looked, and behold, there was no man, and all the birds of the sky were scared.
I saw, and, behold, Carmel was desert, and all the cities were burnt with fire at the presence of the Lord, and at the presence of his fierce anger they were utterly destroyed.
Thus saith the Lord, The whole land shall be desolate; but I will not make a full end.
For these things let the earth mourn, and let the sky be dark above: for I have spoken, and I will not repent; I have purposed, and I will not turn back from it.
The whole land has recoiled from the noise of the horseman and the bent bow; they have gone into the caves, and have hidden themselves in the groves, and have gone up upon the rocks: every city was abandoned, no man dwelt in them.
And what wilt thou do? Though thou clothe thyself with scarlet, and adorn thyself with golden ornaments; though thou adorn thine eyes with stibium, thy beauty will be in vain: thy lovers have rejected thee, they seek thy life.
For I have heard thy groaning as the voice of a woman in travail, as of her that brings forth her first child; the voice of the daughter of Zion shall fail through weakness, and she shall lose the strength of her hands, saying, Woe is me! for my soul faints because of the slain.
And Moses went up from Araboth Moab to the mount of Nabau, to the top of Phasga, which is before Jericho; and the Lord shewed him all the mount of Galaad to Dan, and all the land of Nephthali,
and all the land of Ephraim and Manasse, and all the land of Juda to the farthest sea;
and the wilderness, and the country round about Jericho, the city of palm-trees, to Segor.
And the Lord said to Moses, This is the land of which I sware to Abraam, and Isaac, and Jacob, saying, To your seed will I give it: and I have shewed it to thine eyes, but thou shalt not go in thither.
So Moses the servant of the Lord died in the land of Moab by the word of the Lord.
And they buried him in Gai near the house of Phogor; and no one has seen his sepulchre to this day.
And Moses was a hundred and twenty years old at his death; his eyes were not dimmed, nor were his natural powers destroyed.
And the children of Israel wept for Moses in Araboth of Moab at Jordan near Jericho thirty days; and the days of the sad mourning for Moses were completed.
And Joshua the son of Naue was filled with the spirit of knowledge, for Moses had laid his hands upon him; and the children of Israel hearkened to him; and they did as the Lord commanded Moses.
And there rose up no more a prophet in Israel like Moses, whom the Lord knew face to face,
in all the signs and wonders, which the Lord sent him to work in Egypt on Pharao, and his servants, and all his land;
the great wonders, and the mighty hand which Moses displayed before all Israel.
God stands in the assembly of gods; and in the midst of them will judge gods.
How long will ye judge unrighteously, and accept the persons of sinners? Pause.
Judge the orphan and poor: do justice to the low and needy.
Rescue the needy, and deliver the poor out of the hand of the sinner.
They know not, nor understand; they walk on in darkness: all the foundations of the earth shall be shaken.
I have said, Ye are gods; and all of you children of the Most High.
But ye die as men, and fall as one of the princes.
Arise, O God, judge the earth: for thou shalt inherit all nations.
My son, attend to my wisdom, and apply thine ear to my words;
that thou mayest keep good understanding, and the discretion of my lips gives thee a charge. Give no heed to a worthless woman;
for honey drops from the lips of a harlot, who for a season pleases thy palate:
but afterwards thou wilt find her more bitter than gall, and sharper than a two-edged sword.
For the feet of folly lead those who deal with her down to the grave with death; and her steps are not established.
For she goes not upon the paths of life; but her ways are slippery, and not easily known.
Now then, my son, hear me, and make not my words of none effect.
Remove thy way far from her; draw not near to the doors of her house:
lest thou give away thy life to others, and thy substance to the merciless:
lest strangers be filled with thy strength, and thy labours come into the houses of strangers;
And thou repent at last, when the flesh of thy body is consumed,
and thou shalt say, How have I hated instruction, and my heart avoided reproofs!
I heard not the voice of him that instructed me, and taught me, neither did I apply mine ear.
I was almost in all evil in the midst of the congregation and assembly.
Drink waters out of thine own vessels, and out of thine own springing wells.
Let not waters out of thy fountain be spilt by thee, but let thy waters go into thy streets.
Let them be only thine own, and let no stranger partake with thee.
Let thy fountain of water be truly thine own; and rejoice with the wife of thy youth.
Let thy loving hart and thy graceful colt company with thee, and let her be considered thine own, and be with thee at all times; for ravished with her love thou shalt be greatly increased.
Be not intimate with a strange woman, neither fold thyself in the arms of a woman not thine own.
For the ways of a man are before the eyes of God, and he looks on all his paths.
Iniquities ensnare a man, and every one is bound in the chains of his own sins.
Such a man dies with the uninstructed; and he is cast forth from the abundance of his own substance, and has perished through folly.
Behold, the days of the Lord come, and thy spoils shall be divided in thee.
And I will gather all the Gentiles to Jerusalem to war, and the city shall be taken, and the houses plundered, and the women ravished; and half of the city shall go forth into captivity, but the rest of my people shall not be utterly cut off from the city.
And the Lord shall go forth, and fight with those Gentiles as when he fought in the day of war.
And his feet shall stand in that day on the mount of Olives, which is before Jerusalem on the east, and the mount of Olives shall cleave asunder, half of it toward the east and the west, a very great division; and half the mountain shall lean to the north, and half of it to the south.
And the valley of my mountains shall be closed up, and the valley of the mountains shall be joined on to Jasod, and shall be blocked up as it was blocked up in the days of the earthquake, in the days of Ozias king of Juda; and the Lord my God shall come, and all the saints with him.
And it shall come to pass in that day that there shall be no light,
and there shall be for one day cold and frost, and that day shall be known to the Lord, and it shall not be day nor night: but towards evening it shall be light.
And in that day living water shall come forth out of Jerusalem; half of it toward the former sea, and half of it toward the latter sea: and so shall it be in summer and spring.
And the Lord shall be king over all the earth: in that day there shall be one Lord, and his name one,
compassing all the earth, and the wilderness from Gabe unto Remmon south of Jerusalem. And Rama shall remain in its place. From the gate of Benjamin to the place of the first gate, to the gate of the corners, and to the tower of Anameel, as far as the king's winepresses,
they shall dwell in the city; and there shall be no more any curse, and Jerusalem shall dwell securely.
And thou, son of man, take thee a brick, and thou shalt set it before thy face, and shalt portray on it the city, even Jerusalem.
And thou shalt besiege it, and build works against it, and throw up a mound round about it, and pitch camps against it, and set up engines round about.
And take thou to thyself an iron pan, and thou shalt set it for an iron wall between thee and the city: and thou shalt set thy face against it, and it shall be in a siege, and thou shalt besiege it. This is a sign to the children of Israel.
And thou shalt lie upon thy left side, and lay the iniquities of the house of Israel upon it, according to the number of the hundred and fifty days during which thou shalt lie upon it: and thou shalt bear their iniquities.
For I have appointed thee their iniquities for a number of days, for a hundred and ninety days: so thou shalt bear the iniquities of the house of Israel.
And thou shalt accomplish this, and then shalt lie on thy right side, and shalt bear the iniquities of the house of Juda forty days: I have appointed thee a day for a year.
So thou shalt set thy face to the siege of Jerusalem, and shalt strengthen thine arm, and shalt prophesy against it.
And, behold, I have prepared bonds for thee, land thou mayest not turn from thy one side to the other, until the days of thy siege shall be accomplished.
Take thou also to thee wheat, and barley, and beans, and lentils, and millet, and bread-corn; and thou shalt cast them into one earthen vessel, and shalt make them into loaves for thyself; and thou shalt eat them a hundred and ninety days, according to the number of the days during which thou sleepest on thy side.
And thou shalt eat thy food by weight, twenty shekels a day: from time to time shalt thou eat them.
And thou shalt drink water by measure, even from time to time thou shalt drink the sixth part of a hin.
And thou shalt eat them as a barley cake: thou shalt bake them before their eyes in man's dung.
And thou shalt say, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel; Thus shall the children of Israel eat unclean things among the Gentiles.
Then I said, Not so, Lord God of Israel: surely my soul has not been defiled with uncleanness; nor have I eaten, that which died of itself or was torn of beasts from my birth until now; neither has any corrupt flesh entered into my mouth.
And he said to me, Behold, I have given thee dung of oxen instead of man's dung, and thou shalt prepare thy loaves upon it.
And he said to me, Son of man, behold, I break the support of bread in Jerusalem: and they shall eat bread by weight and in want; and shall drink water by measure, and in a state of ruin:
that they may want bread and water; and a man and his brother shall be brought to ruin, and they shall pine away in their iniquities.
I waited patiently for the Lord; and he attended to me, and hearkened to my supplication.
And he brought me up out of a pit of misery, and from miry clay: and he set my feet on a rock, and ordered my goings aright.
And he put a new song into my mouth, even a hymn to our God: many shall see it, and fear, and shall hope in the Lord.
Blessed is the man whose hope is in the name of the Lord, and who has not regarded vanities and false frenzies.
O Lord my God, thou hast multiplied thy wonderful works, and in thy thoughts there is none who shall be likened to thee: I declared and spoke of them: they exceeded number.
Sacrifice and offering thou wouldest not; but a body hast thou prepared me: whole-burnt-offering and sacrifice for sin thou didst not require.
Then I said, Behold, I come: in the volume of the book it is written concerning me,
I desired to do thy will, O my God, and thy law in the midst of mine heart.
I have preached righteousness in the great congregation; lo! I will not refrain my lips; O Lord, thou knowest my righteousness.
I have not hid thy truth within my heart, and I have declared thy salvation; I have not hid thy mercy and thy truth from the great congregation.
But thou, Lord, remove not thy compassion far from me; thy mercy and thy truth have helped me continually.
For innumerable evils have encompassed me; my transgressions have taken hold of me, and I could not see; they are multiplied more than the hairs of my head; and my heart has failed me.
Be pleased, O Lord, to deliver me; O Lord, draw nigh to help me.
Let those that seek my soul, to destroy it, be ashamed and confounded together; let those that wish me evil be turned backward and put to shame.
Let those that say to me, Aha, aha, quickly receive shame for their reward.
Let all those that seek thee, O Lord, exult and rejoice in thee; and let them that love thy salvation say continually, The Lord be magnified.
But I am poor and needy; the Lord will take care of me; thou art my helper, and my defender, O my God, delay not.
Hearken to me, ye islands; and attend, ye Gentiles; after a long time it shall come to pass, saith the Lord: from my mother's womb he has called my name:
and he has made my mouth as a sharp sword, and he has hid me under the shadow of his hand; he has made me as a choice shaft, and he has hid me in his quiver;
and said to me, Thou art my servant, O Israel, and in thee I will be glorified.
Then I said, I have laboured in vain, I have given my strength for vanity and for nothing: therefore is my judgment with the Lord, and my labour before my God.
And now, thus saith the Lord that formed me from the womb to be his own servant, to gather Jacob to him and Israel. I shall be gathered and glorified before the Lord, and my God shall be my strength.
And he said to me, It is a great thing for thee to be called my servant, to establish the tribes of Jacob, and to recover the dispersion of Israel: behold, I have given thee for the covenant of a race, for a light of the Gentiles, that thou shouldest be for salvation to the end of the earth.
Thus saith the Lord that delivered thee, the God of Israel, Sanctify him that despises his life, him that is abhorred by the nations that are the servants of princes: kings shall behold him, and princes shall arise, and shall worship him, for the Lord's sake: for the Holy One of Israel is faithful, and I have chosen thee.
Thus saith the Lord, In an acceptable time have I heard thee, and in a day of salvation have I succored thee: and I have formed thee, and given thee for a covenant of the nations, to establish the earth, and to cause to inherit the desert heritages:
saying to them that are in bonds, Go forth; and bidding them that are in darkness shew themselves. They shall be fed in all the ways, and in all the paths shall be their pasture.
They shall not hunger, neither shall they thirst; neither shall the heat nor the sun smite them; but he that has mercy on them shall comfort them, and by fountains of waters shall he lead them.
And I will make every mountain a way, and every path a pasture to them.
Behold, these shall come from far: and these from the north and the west, and others from the land of the Persians.
Rejoice, ye heavens; and let the earth be glad: let the mountains break forth with joy; for the Lard has had mercy on his people, and has comforted the lowly ones of his people.
But Sion said, The Lord has forsaken me, and, The Lord has forgotten me.
Will a woman forget her child, so as not to have compassion upon the offspring of her womb? but if a woman should even forget these, yet I will not forget thee, saith the Lord.
Behold, I have painted thy walls on my hands, and thou art continually before me.
And thou shalt soon be built by those by whom thou were destroyed, and they that made thee desolate shall go forth of thee.
Lift up thine eyes round about, and look on them all; behold, they are gathered together, and are come to thee. As I live, saith the Lord, thou shalt clothe thyself with them all as with an ornament, and put them on as a bride her attire.
For thy desert and marred and ruined places shall now be too narrow by reason of the inhabitants, and they that devoured thee shall be removed far from thee.
For thy sons whom thou hast lost shall say in thine ears, The place is too narrow for me: make room for me that I may dwell.
And thou shalt say in thine heart, Who has begotten me these? whereas I was childless, and a widow; but who has brought up these for me? and I was left alone; but whence came these to me?
Thus saith the Lord, even the Lord, Behold, I lift up mine hand to the nations, and I will lift up my signal to the islands: and they shall bring thy sons in their bosom, and shall bear thy daughters on their shoulders.
And kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and their princesses thy nurses, they shall bow down to thee on the face of the earth, and shall lick the dust of thy feet; and thou shalt know that I am the Lord, and they that wait on me shall not be ashamed.
Will any one take spoils from a giant? and if one should take a man captive unjustly, shall he be delivered?
For thus saith the Lord, If one should take a giant captive, he shall take spoils, and he who takes them from a mighty man shall be delivered: for I will plead thy cause, and I will deliver thy children.
And they that afflicted thee shall eat their own flesh; and they shall drink their own blood as new wine, and shall be drunken: and all flesh shall perceive that I am the Lord that delivers thee, and that upholds the strength of Jacob.
A wise son is obedient to his father: but a disobedient son will be destroyed.
A good man shall eat of the fruits of righteousness: but the lives of transgressors shall perish before their time.
He that keeps his own mouth keeps his own life: but he that is hasty with his lips shall bring terror upon himself.
Every slothful man desires, but the hands of the active are diligent.
A righteous man hates an unjust word: but an ungodly man is ashamed, and will have no confidence.
There are some who, having nothing, enrich themselves: and there are some who bring themselves down in the midst of much wealth.
A man's own wealth is the ransom of his life: but the poor endures not threatening.
The righteous always have light: but the light of the ungodly is quenched. Crafty souls go astray in sins: but just men pity, and are merciful.
A bad man does evil with insolence: but they that are judges of themselves are wise.
Wealth gotten hastily with iniquity is diminished: but he that gathers for himself with godliness shall be increased. The righteous is merciful, and lends.
Better is he that begins to help heartily, than he that promises and leads another to hope: for a good desire is a tree of life.
He that slights a matter shall be slighted of it: but he that fears the commandment has health of soul. To a crafty son there shall be nothing good: but a wise servant shall have prosperous doings, and his way shall be directed aright.
The law of the wise is fountain of life: but the man void of understanding shall die by a snare.
Sound discretion gives favour, and to know the law is the part of a sound understanding: but the ways of scorners tend to destruction.
Every prudent man acts with knowledge: but the fool displays his own mischief.
A rash king shall fall into mischief: but a wise messenger shall deliver him.
Instruction removes poverty and disgrace: but he that attends to reproofs shall be honoured.
The desires of the godly gladden the soul, but the works of the ungodly are far from knowledge.
If thou walkest with wise men thou shalt be wise: but he that walks with fools shall be known.
Evil shall pursue sinners; but good shall overtake the righteous.
A good man shall inherit children's children; and the wealth of ungodly men is laid up for the just.
The righteous shall spend many years in wealth: but the unrighteous shall perish suddenly.
He that spares the rod hates his son: but he that loves, carefully chastens him.
A just man eats and satisfies his soul: but the souls of the ungodly are in want.
I saw that the righteous, and the wise, and their works, are in the hand of God: yea, there is no man that knows either love or hatred, though all are before their face.
Vanity is in all: there is one event to the righteous, and to the wicked; to the good, and to the bad; both to the pure, and to the impure; both to him that sacrifices, and to him that sacrifice not: as is the good, so is the sinner: as is the swearer, even so is he that fears an oath.
There is this evil in all that is done under the sun, that there is one event to all: yea, the heart of the sons of men is filled with evil, and madness is in their heart during their life, and after that they go to the dead.
for who is he that has fellowship with all the living? there is hope of him: for a living dog is better than a dead lion.
For the living will know that they shall die: but the dead know nothing, and there is no longer any reward to them; for their memory is lost.
also their love, and their hatred, and their envy, have now perished; yea, there is no portion for them any more for ever in all that is done under the sun.
Go, eat thy bread with mirth, and drink thy wine with a joyful heart; for now God has favourably accepted thy works.
Let thy garments be always white; and let not oil be wanting on thine head.
And see life with the wife whom thou lovest all the days of the life of thy vanity, which are given thee under the sun: for that is thy portion in thy life, and in thy labour wherein thou labourest under the sun.
Whatsoever thine hand shall find to do, do with all thy might; for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in Hades wither thou goest.
I returned, and saw under the sun, that the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, nor yet bread to the wise, nor yet wealth to men of understanding, nor yet favour to men of knowledge; for time and chance will happen to them all.
For surely man also knows not his time: as fishes that are taken in an evil net, and as birds that are caught in a snare; even thus the sons of men are snared at an evil time, when it falls suddenly upon them.
This I also saw to be wisdom under the sun, and it is great before me:
suppose there were a little city, and few men in it; and there should come against it a great king, and surround it, and build great mounds against it;
and should find in it a poor wise man, and he should save the city through his wisdom: yet no man would remember that poor man.
And I said Wisdom is better than power: yet the wisdom of the poor man is set at nought, and his words not listened to.
The words of the wise are heard in quiet more than the cry of them that rule in folly.
Wisdom is better than weapons of war: and one sinner will destroy much good.
And the Lord said to Moses, Go in to Pharao, and thou shalt say to him, These things saith the Lord God of the Hebrews; Send my people away that they may serve me.
If however thou wilt not send my people away, but yet detainest them:
behold, the hand of the Lord shall be upon thy cattle in the fields, both on the horses, and on the asses, and on the camels and oxen and sheep, a very great mortality.
And I will make a marvellous distinction in that time between the cattle of the Egyptians, and the cattle of the children of Israel: nothing shall die of all that is of the children's of Israel.
And God fixed a limit, saying, To-morrow the Lord will do this thing on the land.
And the Lord did this thing on the next day, and all the cattle of the Egyptians died, but of the cattle of the children of Israel there died not one.
And when Pharao saw, that of all the cattle of the children of Israel there died not one, the heart of Pharao was hardened, and he did not let the people go.
And the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying, Take you handfuls of ashes of the furnace, and let Moses scatter it toward heaven before Pharao, and before his servants.
And let it become dust over all the land of Egypt, and there shall be upon men and upon beasts sore blains breaking forth both on men and on beasts, in all the land of Egypt.
So he took of the ashes of the furnace before Pharao, and Moses scattered it toward heaven, and it became sore blains breaking forth both on men and on beasts.
And the sorcerers could not stand before Moses because of the sores, for the sores were on the sorcerers, and in all the land of Egypt.
And the Lord hardened Pharao's heart, and he hearkened not to them, as the Lord appointed.
And the Lord said to Moses, Rise up early in the morning, and stand before Pharao; and thou shalt say to him, These things saith the Lord God of the Hebrews, Send away my people that they may serve me.
For at this present time do I send forth all my plagues into thine heart, and the heart of thy servants and of thy people; that thou mayest know that there is not another such as I in all the earth.
For now I will stretch forth my hand and smite thee and kill thy people, and thou shalt be consumed from off the earth.
And for this purpose hast thou been preserved, that I might display in thee my strength, and that my name might bepublished in all the earth.
Dost thou then yet exert thyself to hinder my people, so as not to let them go?
Behold, to-morrow at this hour I will rain a very great hail, such as has not been in Egypt, from the time it was created until this day.
Now then hasten to gather thy cattle, and all that thou hast in the fields; for all the men and cattle as many as shall be found in the fields, and shall not enter into a house, (but the hail shall fall upon them,) shall die.
He of the servants of Pharao that feared the word of the Lord, gathered his cattle into the houses.
And he that did not attend in his mind to the word of the Lord, left the cattle in the fields.
And the Lord said to Moses, Stretch out thine hand to heaven, and there shall be hail on all the land of Egypt, both on the men and on the cattle, and on all the herbage on the land.
And Moses stretched forth his hand to heaven, and the Lord sent thunderings and hail; and the fire ran along upon the ground, and the Lord rained hail on all the land of Egypt.
So there was hail and flaming fire mingled with hail; and the hail was very great, such as was not in Egypt, from the time there was a nation upon it.
And the hail smote in all the land of Egypt both man and beast, and the hail smote all the grass in the field, and the hail broke in pieces all the trees in the field.
Only in the land of Gesem where the children of Israel were, the hail was not.
And Pharao sent and called Moses and Aaron, and said to them, I have sinned this time: the Lord is righteous, and I and my people are wicked.
Pray then for me to the Lord, and let him cause the thunderings of God to cease, and the hail and the fire, and I will send you forth and ye shall remain no longer.
And Moses said to him, When I shall have departed from the city, I will stretch out my hands to the Lord, and the thunderings shall cease, and the hail and the rain shall be no longer, that thou mayest know that the earth is the Lord's.
But as for thee and thy servants, I know that ye have not yet feared the Lord.
And the flax and the barley were smitten, for the barley was advanced, and the flax was seeding.
But the wheat and the rye were not smitten, for they were late.
And Moses went forth from Pharao out of the city, and stretched out his hands to the Lord, and the thunders ceased and the hail, and the rain did not drop on the earth.
And when Pharao saw that the rain and the hail and the thunders ceased, he continued to sin; and he hardened his heart, and the heart of his servants.
And the heart of Pharao was hardened, and he did not send forth the children of Israel, as the Lord said to Moses.
And Saphanias the son of Nathan, and Godolias the son of Paschor, and Joachal the son of Semelias, heard the words which Jeremias spoke to the people, saying,
Thus saith the Lord; He that remains in this city shall die by the sword, and by the famine: but he that goes out to the Chaldeans shall live; and his soul shall be given him for a found treasure, and he shall live.
For thus saith the Lord; This city shall certainly be delivered into the hands of the host of the king of Babylon, and they shall take it.
And they said to the king, Let that man, we pray thee, be slain, for he weakens the hands of the fighting men that are left in the city, and the hands of all the people, speaking to them according to these words: for this man does not prophesy peace to this people, but evil.
Then the king said, Behold, he is in your hands. For the king could not resist them.
And they cast him into the dungeon of Melchias the king's son, which was in the court of the prison; and they let him down into the pit: and there was no water in the pit, but mire: and he was in the mire.
And Abdemelech the Ethiopian heard, (now he was in the king's household,) that they had put Jeremias into the dungeon; and the king was in the gate of Benjamin:
and he went forth to him, and spoke to the king and said,
Thou hast done evil in what thou hast done to slay this man with hunger: for there is no more bread in the city.
And the king commanded Abdemelech, saying, Take with thee hence thirty men, and bring him up out of the dungeon, that he die not.
So Abdemelech took the men and went into the underground part of the king's house, and took thence old rags and old ropes, and threw them to Jeremias into the dungeon.
And he said, Put these under the ropes. And Jeremias did so.
And they drew him with the ropes, and lifted him out of the dungeon: and Jeremias remained in the court of the prison.
Then the king sent, and called him to himself into the house of Aselisel, which was in the house of the Lord: and the king said to him, I will ask thee a question, and I pray thee hide nothing from me.
And Jeremias said to the king, If I tell thee, wilt thou not certainly put me to death? and if I give thee counsel, thou wilt not at all hearken to me.
And the king swore to him, saying, As the Lord lives who gave us this soul, I will not slay thee, neither will I give thee into the hands of these men.
And Jeremias said to him, Thus saith the Lord; If thou wilt indeed go forth to the captains of the king of Babylon, thy soul shall live, and this city shall certainly not be burnt with fire; and thou shalt live, and thy house.
But if thou wilt not go forth this city shall be delivered into the hands of the Chaldeans, and they shall burn it with fire, and thou shalt by no means escape.
And the king said to Jeremias, I consider the Jews that have gone over to the Chaldeans, lest they deliver me into their hands, and they mock me.
And Jeremias said, They shall in no wise deliver thee up. Hear the word of the Lord which I speak to thee; and it shall be better for thee, and thy soul shall live.
But if thou wilt not go forth, this is the word which the Lord has shewn me.
And, behold, all the women that are left in the house of the king of Juda were brought forth to the princes of the king of Babylon; and they said, The men who were at peace with thee have deceived thee, and will prevail against thee; and they shall cause thy foot to slide and fail, they have turned back from thee.
And they shall bring forth thy wives and thy children to the Chaldeans: and thou shalt by no means escape, for thou shalt be taken by the hand of the king of Babylon, and this city shall be burnt.
Then the king said to him, Let no man know any of these words, and certainly thou shalt not die.
And if the princes shall hear that I have spoken to thee, and they come to thee, and say to thee, Tell us, what said the king to thee? hide it not from us, and we will in no wise slay thee, and what said the king to thee?
Then thou shalt say to them, I brought my supplication before the presence of the king, that he would not send me back into the house of Jonathan, that I should die there.
And all the princes came to Jeremias, and asked him: and he told them according to all these words, which the king had commanded him. And they were silent, because the word of the Lord was not heard.
And Jeremias remained in the court of the prison, until the time when Jerusalem was taken.
For there is a place for the silver, whence it comes, and a place for the gold, whence it is refined.
For iron comes out of the earth, and brass is hewn out like stone.
He has set a bound to darkness, and he searches out every limit: a stone is darkness, and the shadow of death.
There is a cutting off the torrent by reason of dust: so they that forget the right way are weakened; they are removed from among men.
He has stretched forth his hand on the sharp rock, and turned up mountains by the roots:
And he has laid bare the depths of rivers, and has brought his power to light.
But whence has wisdom been discovered? and what is the place of knowledge?
A mortal has not known its way, neither indeed has it been discovered among men.
Whence then is wisdom found? and of what kind is the place of understanding?
It has escaped the notice of every man, and has been hidden from the birds of the sky.
Destruction and Death said, We have heard the report of it.
God has well ordered the way of it, and he knows the place of it.
For he surveys the whole earth under heaven, knowing the things in the earth:
all that he has made; the weight of the winds, the measures of the water.
When he made them, thus he saw and numbered them, and made a way for the pealing of the thunder.
Then he saw it, and declared it: he prepared it and traced it out.
And he said to man, Behold, godliness is wisdom: and to abstain from evil is understanding.
Righteous art thou, O Lord, that I may make my defence to thee, yea, I will speak to thee of judgments. Why is it that the way of ungodly men prospers? that all that deal very treacherously are flourishing?
Thou hast planted them, and they have taken root; they have begotten children, and become fruitful; thou art near to their mouth, and far from their reins.
But thou, Lord, knowest me; thou hast proved my heart before thee; purify them for the day of their slaughter.
How long shall the land mourn, and the grass of the field wither, for the wickedness of them, that dwell in it? the beasts and birds are utterly destroyed; because the people said, God shall not see our ways.
Thy feet run, and they cause thee to faint; how wilt thou prepare to ride upon horses? and thou hast been confident in the land of thy peace? how wilt thou do in the roaring of Jordan?
For even thy brethren and the house of thy father, even these have dealt treacherously with thee; and they have cried out, they are gathered together in pursuit of thee; trust not thou in them, though they shall speak fair words to thee.
I have forsaken mine house, I have left mine heritage; I have given my beloved one into the hands of her enemies.
My inheritance has become to me as a lion in a forest; she has uttered her voice against me; therefore have I hated her.
Is not my inheritance to me a hyaena's cave, or a cave round about her? Go ye, gather together all the wild beasts of the field, and let them come to devour her.
Many shepherds have destroyed my vineyard, they have defiled my portion, they have made my desirable portion a trackless wilderness;
it is made a complete ruin: for my sake the whole land has been utterly ruined, because there is none that lays the matter to heart.
The ravagers are come to every passage in the wilderness: for the sword of the Lord will devour from one end of the land to the other: no flesh has any peace.
Sow wheat, and reap thorns; their portions shall not profit them: be ashamed of your boasting, because of reproach before the Lord.
For thus saith the Lord, concerning all the evil neighbours that touch mine inheritance, which I have divided to my people Israel; Behold, I will draw them away from their land, and I will cast out Juda from the midst of them.
My son, defraud not the poor of his living, and make not the needy eyes to wait long.
Make not an hungry soul sorrowful; neither provoke a man in his distress.
Add not more trouble to an heart that is vexed; and defer not to give to him that is in need.
Reject not the supplication of the afflicted; neither turn away thy face from a poor man.
Turn not away thine eye from the needy, and give him none occasion to curse thee:
For if he curse thee in the bitterness of his soul, his prayer shall be heard of him that made him.
Get thyself the love of the congregation, and bow thy head to a great man.
Let it not grieve thee to bow down thine ear to the poor, and give him a friendly answer with meekness.
Deliver him that suffereth wrong from the hand of the oppressor; and be not fainthearted when thou sittest in judgment.
Be as a father unto the fatherless, and instead of an husband unto their mother: so shalt thou be as the son of the most High, and he shall love thee more than thy mother doth.
Wisdom exalteth her children, and layeth hold of them that seek her.
He that loveth her loveth life; and they that seek to her early shall be filled with joy.
He that holdeth her fast shall inherit glory; and wheresoever she entereth, the Lord will bless.
They that serve her shall minister to the Holy One: and them that love her the Lord doth love.
Whoso giveth ear unto her shall judge the nations: and he that attendeth unto her shall dwell securely.
If a man commit himself unto her, he shall inherit her; and his generation shall hold her in possession.
For at the first she will walk with him by crooked ways, and bring fear and dread upon him, and torment him with her discipline, until she may trust his soul, and try him by her laws.
Then will she return the straight way unto him, and comfort him, and shew him her secrets.
But if he go wrong, she will forsake him, and give him over to his own ruin.
Observe the opportunity, and beware of evil; and be not ashamed when it concerneth thy soul.
For there is a shame that bringeth sin; and there is a shame which is glory and grace.
Accept no person against thy soul, and let not the reverence of any man cause thee to fall.
And refrain not to speak, when there is occasion to do good, and hide not thy wisdom in her beauty.
For by speech wisdom shall be known: and learning by the word of the tongue.
In no wise speak against the truth; but be abashed of the error of thine ignorance.
Be not ashamed to confess thy sins; and force not the course of the river.
Make not thyself an underling to a foolish man; neither accept the person of the mighty.
Strive for the truth unto death, and the Lord shall fight for thee.
Be not hasty in thy tongue, and in thy deeds slack and remiss.
Be not as a lion in thy house, nor frantick among thy servants.
Let not thine hand be stretched out to receive, and shut when thou shouldest repay.
O God, the heathen are come into thine inheritance; they have polluted thy holy temple; they have made Jerusalem a storehouse of fruits.
They have given the dead bodies of thy servants to be food for the birds of the sky, the flesh of thy holy ones for the wild beasts of the earth.
They have shed their blood as water, round about Jerusalem; and there was none to bury them.
We are become a reproach to our neighbours, a scorn and derision to them that are round about us.
How long, O Lord? wilt thou be angry for ever? shall thy jealousy burn like fire?
Pour out thy wrath upon the heathen that have not known thee, and upon the kingdoms which have not called upon thy name.
For they have devoured Jacob, and laid his place waste.
Remember not our old transgressions; let thy tender mercies speedily prevent us; for we are greatly impoverished.
Help us, O God our Saviour; for the glory of thy name, O Lord, deliver us; and be merciful to our sins, for thy name's sake.
Lets haply they should say among the heathen, Where is their God? and let the avenging of thy servant's blood that has been shed be known among the heathen before our eyes.
Let the groaning of the prisoners come in before thee; according to the greatness of thine arm preserve the sons of the slain ones.
Repay to our neighbours sevenfold into their bosom their reproach, with which they have reproached thee, O Lord.
For we are thy people and the sheep of thy pasture; we will give thee thanks for ever; we will declare thy praise throughout all generations.
Sing to the Lord a new song; for the Lord has wrought wonderful works, his right hand, and his holy arm, have wrought salvation for him.
The Lord has made known his salvation, he has revealed his righteousness in the sight of the nations.
He has remembered his mercy to Jacob, and his truth to the house of Israel; all the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God.
Shout to God, all the earth; sing, and exult, and sing psalms.
Sing to the Lord with a harp, with a harp, and the voice of a psalm.
With trumpets of metal, and the sound of a trumpet of horn make a joyful noise to the Lord before the king.
Let the sea be moved, and the fullness of it; the world, and they that dwell in it.
The rivers shall clap their hands together; the mountains shall exult.
For he is come to judge the earth; he shall judge the world in righteousness, and the nations in uprightness.
Thus shalt thou do to his ass, and thus shalt thou do to his garment, and thus shalt thou do to every thing that thy brother has lost; whatsoever shall have been lost by him, and thou shalt have found, thou shalt not have power to overlook.
Thou shalt not see the ass of thy brother, or his calf, fallen in the way: thou shalt not overlook them, thou shalt surely help him to raise them up.
The apparel of a man shall not be on a woman, neither shall a man put on a woman's dress; for every one that does these things is an abomination to the Lord thy God.
And if thou shouldest come upon a brood of birds before thy face in the way or upon any tree, or upon the earth, young or eggs, and the mother be brooding on the young or the eggs, thou shalt not take the dam with the young ones.
Thou shalt by all means let the mother go, but thou shalt take the young to thyself; that it may be well with thee, and that thou mayest live long.
If thou shouldest build a new house, then shalt thou make a parapet to thy house; so thou shalt not bring blood-guiltiness upon thy house, if one should in any wise fall from it.
Thou shalt not sow thy vineyard with diverse seed, lest the fruit be devoted, and whatsoever seed thou mayest sow, with the fruit of thy vineyard.
Thou shalt not plough with an ox and an ass together.
Thou shalt not wear a mingled garment, woollen and linen together.
Thou shalt make fringes on the four borders of thy garments, with which soever thou mayest be clothed.
And if any one should take a wife, and dwell with her, and hate her,
and attach to her reproachful words, and bring against her an evil name, and say, I took this woman, and when I came to her I found not her tokens of virginity:
then the father and the mother of the damsel shall take and bring out the damsel's tokens of virginity to the elders of the city to the gate.
And the father of the damsel shall say to the elders, I gave this my daughter to this man for a wife;
and now he has hated her, and attaches reproachful words to her, saying, I have not found tokens of virginity with thy daughter; and these are the tokens of my daughter's virginity. And they shall unfold the garment before the elders of the city.
And the elders of that city shall take that man, and shall chastise him,
and shall fine him a hundred shekels, and shall give them to the father of the damsel, because he has brought forth an evil name against a virgin of Israel; and she shall be his wife: he shall never be able to put her away.
But if this report be true, and the tokens of virginity be not found for the damsel;
then shall they bring out the damsel to the doors of her father's house, and shall stone her with stones, and she shall die; because she has wrought folly among the children of Israel, to defile the house of her father by whoring: so thou shalt remove the evil one from among you.
And if a man be found lying with a woman married to a man, ye shall kill them both, the man that lay with the woman, and the woman: so shalt thou remove the wicked one out of Israel.
And if there be a young damsel espoused to a man, and a man should have found her in the city and have lain with her;
ye shall bring them both out to the gate of their city, and they shall be stoned with stones, and they shall die; the damsel, because she cried not in the city; and the man, because he humbled his neighbour's spouse: so shalt thou remove the evil one from yourselves.
But if a man find in the field a damsel that is betrothed, and he should force her and lie with her, ye shall slay the man that lay with her only.
And the damsel has not committed a sin worthy of death; as if a man should rise up against his neighbour, and slay him, so is this thing;
because he found her in the field; the betrothed damsel cried, and there was none to help her.
And if any one should find a young virgin who has not been betrothed, and should force her and lie with her, and be found,
the man who lay with her shall give to the father of the damsel fifty silver didrachms, and she shall be his wife, because he has humbled her; he shall never be able to put her away.
And the Lord said to me, Take to thyself a volume of a great new book, and write in it with a man's pen concerning the making a rapid plunder of spoils; for it is near at hand.
And make me witnesses of faithful men, Urias, and Zacharias the son of Barachias.
And I went in to the prophetess; and she conceived, and bore a son. And the Lord said to me, Call his name, Spoil quickly, plunder speedily.
For before the child shall know how to call his father or his mother, one shall take the power of Damascus and the spoils of Samaria before the king of the Assyrians.
And the Lord spoke to me yet again, saying,
Because this people chooses not the water of Siloam that goes softly, but wills to have Rassin, and the son of Romelias to be king over you;
therefore, behold, the Lord brings up upon you the water of the river, strong and abundant, even the king of the Assyrians, and his glory: and he shall come up over every valley of yours, and shall walk over every wall of yours:
and he shall take away from Juda every man who shall be able to lift up his head, and every one able to accomplish anything; and his camp shall fill the breadth of thy land, O God with us.
Know, ye Gentiles, and be conquered; hearken ye, even to the extremity of the earth: be conquered, after ye strengthened yourselves; for even if ye should again strengthen yourselves, ye shall again be conquered.
And whatsoever counsel ye shall take, the Lord shall bring it to nought; and whatsoever word ye shall speak, it shall not stand among you: for God is with us.
Thus saith the Lord, With a strong hand they revolt from the course of the way of this people, saying,
Let them not say, It is hard, for whatsoever this people says, is hard: but fear not ye their fear, neither be dismayed.
Sanctify ye the Lord himself; and he shall be thy fear.
And if thou shalt trust in him, he shall be to thee for a sanctuary; and ye shall not come against him as against a stumbling-stone, neither as against the falling of a rock: but the houses of Jacob are in a snare, and the dwellers in Jerusalem in a pit.
Therefore many among them shall be weak, and fall, and be crushed; and they shall draw nigh, and men shall be taken securely.
Then shall those who seal themselves that they may not learn the law be made manifest.
And one shall say, I will wait for God, who has turned away his face from the house of Jacob, and I will trust in him.
Behold I and the children which God has given me: and they shall be for signs and wonders in the house of Israel from the Lord of hosts, who dwells in mount Sion.
And if they should say to you, Seek those who have in them a divining spirit, and them that speak out of the earth, them that speak vain words, who speak out of their belly: shall not a nation diligently seek to their God? why do they seek to the dead concerning the living?
For he has given the law for a help, that they should not speak according to this word, concerning which there are no gifts to give for it.
And famine shall come sorely upon you, and it shall come to pass, that when ye shall be hungry, ye shall be grieved, and ye shall speak ill of the prince and your fathers' ordinances: and they shall look up to heaven above,
and they shall look on the earth below, and behold severe distress, and darkness, affliction, and anguish, and darkness so that one cannot see; and he that is in anguish shall not be distressed only for a time.
And these are the things which thou shalt do to them: thou shalt sanctify them, so that they shall serve me in the priesthood; and thou shalt take one young calf from the herd, and two unblemished rams;
and unleavened loaves kneaded with oil, and unleavened cakes anointed with oil: thou shalt make them of fine flour of wheat.
And thou shalt put them on one basket, and thou shalt offer them on the basket, and the young calf and the two rams.
And thou shalt bring Aaron and his sons to the doors of the tabernacle of testimony, and thou shalt wash them with water.
And having taken the garments, thou shalt put on Aaron thy brother both the full-length robe and the ephod and the oracle; and thou shalt join for him the oracle to the ephod.
And thou shalt put the mitre on his head; and thou shalt put the plate, even the Holiness, on the mitre.
And thou shalt take of the anointing oil, and thou shalt pour it on his head, and shalt anoint him,
and thou shalt bring his sons, and put garments on them.
And thou shalt gird them with the girdles, and put the tires upon them, and they shall have a priestly office to me for ever; and thou shalt fill the hands of Aaron and the hands of his sons.
Hear ye this word, O house of Israel, which the Lord has spoken concerning you, and against the whole family whom I brought up out of the land of Egypt, saying,
You especially have I known out of all the families of the earth: therefore will I take vengeance upon you for all your sins.
Shall two walk together at all, if they do not know one another?
Will a lion roar out of his thicket if he has no prey? will a lion's whelp utter his voice at all out of his lair, if he have taken nothing?
Will a bird fall on the earth without a fowler? will a snare be taken up from the earth without having taken anything?
Shall the trumpet sound in the city, and the people not be alarmed? shall there be evil in a city which the Lord has not wrought?
For the Lord God will do nothing, without revealing instruction to his servants the prophets.
A lion shall roar, and who will not be alarmed? the Lord God has spoken, and who will not prophesy?
Proclaim it to the regions among the Assyrians, and to the regions of Egypt, and say, Gather yourselves to the mountain of Samaria, and behold many wonderful things in the midst of it, and the oppression that is in it.
And she knew not what things would come against her, saith the Lord, even those that store up wrong and misery in their countries.
Therefore thus saith the Lord God; O Tyre, thy land shall be made desolate round about thee; and he shall bring down thy strength out of thee, and thy countries shall be spoiled.
Thus saith the Lord; As when a shepherd rescues from the mouth of a lion two legs or a piece of an ear, so shall be drawn forth the children of Israel who dwell in Samaria in the presence of a foreign tribe, and in Damascus.
Hear, O ye priests, and testify to the house of Jacob, saith the Lord God Almighty.
For in the day wherein I shall take vengeance of the sins of Israel upon him, I will also take vengeance on the altars of Bethel: and the horns of the altar shall be broken down, and they shall fall upon the ground.
I will crush and smite the turreted-house upon the summer-house; and the ivory-houses shall be destroyed, and many other houses also, saith the Lord.
Then Baldad the Sauchite answered, and said,
How long wilt thou speak these things, how long shall the breath of thy mouth be abundant in words?
Will the Lord be unjust when he judges; or will he that has made all things pervert justice?
If thy sons have sinned before him, he has cast them away because of their transgression.
But be thou early in prayer to the Lord Almighty.
If thou art pure and true, he will hearken to thy supplication, and will restore to thee the habitation of righteousness.
Though then thy beginning should be small, yet thy end should be unspeakably great.
For ask of the former generation, and search diligently among the race of our fathers:
(for we are of yesterday, and know nothing; for our life upon the earth is a shadow:)
shall not these teach thee, and report to thee, and bring out words from their heart?
Does the rush flourish without water, or shall the flag grow up without moisture?
When it is yet on the root, and though it has not been cut down, does not any herb wither before it has received moisture?
Thus then shall be the end of all that forget the Lord: for the hope of the ungodly shall perish.
For his house shall be without inhabitants, and his tent shall prove a spider's web.
If he should prop up his house, it shall not stand: and when he has taken hold of it, it shall not remain.
For it is moist under the sun, and his branch shall come forth out of his dung-heap.
He lies down upon a gathering of stones, and shall live in the mist of flints.
If God should destroy him, his place shall deny him. Hast thou not seen such things,
that such is the overthrow of the ungodly? and out of the earth another shall grow.
For the Lord will by no means reject the harmless man; but he will not receive any gift of the ungodly.
But he will fill with laughter the mouth of the sincere, and their lips with thanksgiving.
But their adversaries shall clothe themselves with shame; and the habitation of the ungodly shall perish.
And we turned and departed into the wilderness, by the way of the Red Sea, as the Lord spoke to me, and we compassed mount Seir many days.
And the Lord said to me,
Ye have compassed this mount long enough; turn therefore toward the north.
And charge the people, saying, Ye are going through the borders of your brethren the children of Esau, who dwell in Seir; and they shall fear you, and dread you greatly.
Do not engage in war against them, for I will not give you of their land even enough to set your foot upon, for I have given mount Seir to the children of Esau as an inheritance.
Buy food of them for money and eat, and ye shall receive water of them by measure for money, and drink.
For the Lord our God has blessed thee in every work of thy hands. Consider how thou wentest through that great and terrible wilderness: behold, the Lord thy God has been with thee forty years; thou didst not lack any thing.
And we passed by our brethren the children of Esau, who dwelt in Seir, by the way of Araba from Aelon and from Gesion Gaber; and we turned and passed by the way of the desert of Moab.
And the Lord said to me, Do not ye quarrel with the Moabites, and do not engage in war with them; for I will not give you of their land for an inheritance, for I have given Aroer to the children of Lot to inherit.
Formerly the Ommin dwelt in it, a great and numerous nation and powerful, like the Enakim.
These also shall be accounted Raphain like the Enakim; and the Moabites call them Ommin.
And the Chorrhite dwelt in Seir before, and the sons of Esau destroyed them, and utterly consumed them from before them; and they dwelt in their place, as Israel did to the land of his inheritance, which the Lord gave to them.
Now then, arise ye, said I, and depart, and cross the valley of Zaret.
And the days in which we traveled from Cades Barne till we crossed the valley of Zaret, were thirty and eight years, until the whole generation of the men of war failed, dying out of the camp, as the Lord God sware to them.
And the hand of the Lord was upon them to destroy them out of the midst of the camp, until they were consumed.
And it came to pass when all the men of war dying out of the midst of the people had fallen,
that the Lord spoke to me, saying,
Thou shalt pass over this day the borders of Moab to Aroer;
and ye shall draw nigh to the children of Amman: do not quarrel with them, nor wage war with them; for I will not give thee of the land of the children of Amman for an inheritance, because I have given it to the children of Lot for an inheritance.
It shall be accounted a land of Raphain, for the Raphain dwelt there before, and the Ammanites call them Zochommin.
A great nation and populous, and mightier than you, as also the Enakim: yet the Lord destroyed them from before them, and they inherited their land, and they dwelt there instead of them until this day.
As they did to the children of Esau that dwell in Seir, even as they destroyed the Chorrhite from before them, and inherited their country, and dwelt therein instead of them until this day.
And the Evites who dwell in Asedoth to Gaza, and the Cappadocians who came out of Cappadocia, destroyed them, and dwelt in their room.
Now then arise and depart, and pass over the valley of Arnon: behold, I have delivered into thy hands Seon the king of Esebon the Amorite, and his land: begin to inherit it: engage in war with him this day.
Begin to put thy terror and thy fear on the face of all the nations under heaven, who shall be troubled when they have heard thy name, and shall be in anguish before thee.
And I sent ambassadors from the wilderness of Kedamoth to Seon king of Esebon with peaceable words, saying,
I will pass through thy land: I will go by the road, I will not turn aside to the right hand or to the left.
Thou shalt give me food for money, and I will eat; and thou shalt give me water for money, and I will drink; I will only go through on my feet:
as the sons of Esau did to me, who dwelt in Seir, and the Moabites who dwelt in Aroer, until I shall have passed Jordan into the land which the Lord our God gives us.
And Seon king of Esebon would not that we should pass by him, because the Lord our God hardened his spirit, and made his heart stubborn, that he might be delivered into thy hands, as on this day.
And the Lord said to me, Behold, I have begun to deliver before thee Seon the king of Esebon the Amorite, and his land, and do thou begin to inherit his land.
And Seon the king of Esebon came forth to meet us, he and all his people to war at Jassa.
And the Lord our God delivered him before our face, and we smote him, and his sons, and all his people.
And we took possession of all his cities at that time, and we utterly destroyed every city in succession, and their wives, and their children; we left no living prey.
Only we took the cattle captive, and took the spoil of the cities.
From Aroer, which is by the brink of the brook of Arnon, and the city which is in the valley, and as far as the mount of Galaad; there was not a city which escaped us: the Lord our God delivered all of them into our hands.
Only we did not draw near to the children of Amman, even all the parts bordering on the brook Jaboc, and the cities in the mountain country, as the Lord our God charged us.
Woe to the crown of pride, the hirelings of Ephraim, the flower that has fallen from the glory of the top of the fertile mountain, they that are drunken without wine.
Behold, the anger of the Lord is strong and severe, as descending hail where there is no shelter, violently descending; as a great body of water sweeping away the soil, he shall make rest for the land.
The crown of pride, the hirelings of Ephraim, shall be beaten down with the hands and with the feet.
And the fading flower of the glorious hope on the top of the high mountain shall be as the early fig; he that sees it, before he takes it into his hand, will desire to swallow it down.
In that day the Lord of hosts shall be the crown of hope, the woven crown of glory, to the remnant of the people.
They shall be left in the spirit of judgment for judgment, and for the strength of them that hinder slaying.
For these have trespassed through wine; they have erred through strong drink: the priest and the prophet are mad through strong drink, they are swallowed up by reason of wine, they have staggered through drunkenness; they have erred: this is their vision.
A curse shall devour this counsel, for this is their counsel for the sake of covetousness.
To whom have we reported evils? and to whom have we reported a message? even to those that are weaned from the milk, who are drawn from the breast.
Expect thou affliction on affliction, hope upon hope: yet a little, and yet a little,
by reason of the contemptuous words of the lips, by means of another language: for they shall speak to this people, saying to them,
This is the rest to him that is hungry, and this is the calamity: but they would not hear.
Therefore the oracle of God shall be to them affliction on affliction, hope on hope, yet a little, and yet a little, that they may go and fall backward; and they shall be crushed and shall be in danger, and shall be taken.
Therefore hear ye the word of the Lord, ye afflicted men, and ye princes of this people that is in Jerusalem.
Because ye have said, We have made a covenant with Hades, and agreements with death; if the rushing storm should pass, it shall not come upon us: we have made falsehood our hope, and by falsehood shall we be protected:
Therefore thus saith the Lord, even the Lord, Behold, I lay for the foundations of Sion a costly stone, a choice, a corner-stone, a precious stone, for its foundations; and he that believes on him shall by no means be ashamed.
And I will cause judgment to be for hope, and my compassion shall be for just measures, and ye that trust vainly in falsehood shall fall: for the storm shall by no means pass by you,
except it also take away your covenant of death, and your trust in Hades shall by no means stand: if the rushing storm should come upon you, ye shall be beaten down by it.
ye that are distressed; we cannot fight, but we are ourselves too weak for you to be gathered.
The Lord shall rise up as a mountain of ungodly men, and shall be in the valley of Gabaon; he shall perform his works with wrath, even a work of bitterness, and his wrath shall deal strangely, and his destruction shall be strange.
Therefore do not ye rejoice, neither let your bands be made strong; for I have heard of works finished and cut short by the Lord of hosts, which he will execute upon all the earth.
Hearken, and hear my voice; attend, and hear my words.
Will the ploughman plough all the day? or will he prepare the seed beforehand, before he tills the ground?
Does he not, when he has levelled the surface thereof, then sow the small black poppy, or cumin, and afterward sow wheat, and barley, and millet, and bread-corn in thy borders?
So thou shalt be chastened by the judgment of thy God, and shalt rejoice.
For the black poppy is not cleansed with harsh treatment, nor will a wagon-wheel pass over the cumin; but the black poppy is threshed with a rod, and the cumin shall be eaten with bread;
for I will not be wroth with you for ever, neither shall the voice of my anger crush you.
And these signs came forth from the Lord of hosts. Take counsel, exalt vain comfort.
Thus said the Lord God of Israel; Take the cup of this unmixed wine from mine hand, and thou shalt cause all the nations to drink, to whom I send thee.
And they shall drink, and vomit, and be mad, because of the sword which I send among them.
So I took the cup out of the Lord's hand, and caused the nations to whom the Lord sent me to drink:
Jerusalem, and the cities of Juda, and the kings of Juda, and his princes, to make them a desert place, a desolation, and a hissing;
and Pharao king of Egypt, and his servants, and his nobles, and all his people;
and all the mingled people, and all the kings of the Philistines, and Ascalon, and Gaza, and Accaron, and the remnant of Azotus,
and Idumea, and the land of Moab, and the children of Ammon,
and the kings of Tyre, and the kings of Sidon, and the kings in the country beyond the sea,
and Daedan, and Thaeman, and Ros, and every one that is shaved round about the face,
and all the mingled people lodging in the wilderness,
Wisdom shall praise herself, and shall glory in the midst of her people.
In the congregation of the most High shall she open her mouth, and triumph before his power.
I came out of the mouth of the most High, and covered the earth as a cloud.
I dwelt in high places, and my throne is in a cloudy pillar.
I alone compassed the circuit of heaven, and walked in the bottom of the deep.
In the waves of the sea and in all the earth, and in every people and nation, I got a possession.
With all these I sought rest: and in whose inheritance shall I abide?
So the Creator of all things gave me a commandment, and he that made me caused my tabernacle to rest, and said, Let thy dwelling be in Jacob, and thine inheritance in Israel.
He created me from the beginning before the world, and I shall never fail.
In the holy tabernacle I served before him; and so was I established in Sion.
Likewise in the beloved city he gave me rest, and in Jerusalem was my power.
And I took root in an honourable people, even in the portion of the Lord's inheritance.
I was exalted like a cedar in Libanus, and as a cypress tree upon the mountains of Hermon.
I was exalted like a palm tree in En-gaddi, and as a rose plant in Jericho, as a fair olive tree in a pleasant field, and grew up as a plane tree by the water.
I gave a sweet smell like cinnamon and aspalathus, and I yielded a pleasant odour like the best myrrh, as galbanum, and onyx, and sweet storax, and as the fume of frankincense in the tabernacle.
As the turpentine tree I stretched out my branches, and my branches are the branches of honour and grace.
As the vine brought I forth pleasant savour, and my flowers are the fruit of honour and riches.
Come unto me, all ye that be desirous of me, and fill yourselves with my fruits.
For my memorial is sweeter than honey, and mine inheritance than the honeycomb.
They that eat me shall yet be hungry, and they that drink me shall yet be thirsty.
He that obeyeth me shall never be confounded, and they that work by me shall not do amiss.
All these things are the book of the covenant of the most high God, even the law which Moses commanded for an heritage unto the congregations of Jacob.
He filleth all things with his wisdom, as Phison and as Tigris in the time of the new fruits.
He maketh the understanding to abound like Euphrates, and as Jordan in the time of the harvest.
He maketh the doctrine of knowledge appear as the light, and as Geon in the time of vintage.
The first man knew her not perfectly: no more shall the last find her out.
For her thoughts are more than the sea, and her counsels profounder than the great deep.
I also came out as a brook from a river, and as a conduit into a garden.
I said, I will water my best garden, and will water abundantly my garden bed: and, lo, my brook became a river, and my river became a sea.
I will yet make doctrine to shine as the morning, and will send forth her light afar off.
I will yet pour out doctrine as prophecy, and leave it to all ages for ever.
Behold that I have not laboured for myself only, but for all them that seek wisdom.
Deliver me from mine enemies, O God; and ransom me from those that rise up against me.
Deliver me from the workers of iniquity, and save me from bloody men.
For, behold, they have hunted after my soul; violent men have set upon me: neither is it my iniquity, nor my sin, O Lord.
Without iniquity I ran and directed my course aright: awake to help me, and behold.
And thou, Lord God of hosts, the God of Israel, draw nigh to visit all the heathen; pity not any that work iniquity. Pause.
They shall return at evening, and hunger like a dog, and go round about the city.
Behold, they shall utter a voice with their mouth, and a sword is in their lips; for who, say they, has heard?
But thou, Lord, wilt laugh them to scorn; thou wilt utterly set at nought all the heathen.
will keep my strength, looking to thee; for thou, O God, art my helper.
As for my God, his mercy shall go before me: my God will shew me vengeance on mine enemies.
Slay them not, lest they forget thy law; scatter them by thy power; and bring them down, O Lord, my defender.
For the sin of their mouth, and the word of their lips, let them be even taken in their pride.
And for their cursing and falsehood shall utter destruction be denounced: they shall fall by the wrath of utter destruction, and shall not be; so shall they know that the God of Jacob is Lord of the ends of the earth. Pause.
They shall return at evening, and be hungry as a dog, and go round about the city.
They shall be scattered hither and thither for meat; and if they be not satisfied, they shall even murmur.
But I will sing to thy strength, and in the morning will I exult in thy mercy; for thou hast been my supporter, and my refuge in the day of mine affliction.
Thou art my helper; to thee, my God, will I sing; thou art my supporter, O my God, and my mercy.
but disobey them, and your soul should loathe my judgments, so that ye should not keep all my commands, so as to break my covenant,
then will I do thus to you: I will even bring upon you perplexity and the itch, and the fever that causes your eyes to waste away, and disease that consumes your life; and ye shall sow your seeds in vain, and your enemies shall eat them.
And I will set my face against you, and ye shall fall before your enemies, and they that hate you shall pursue you; and ye shall flee, no one pursuing you.
And if ye still refuse to hearken to me, then will I chasten you yet more even seven times for your sins.
And I will break down the haughtiness of your pride; and I will make your heaven iron, and your earth as it were brass.
And your strength shall be in vain; and your land shall not yield its seed, and the tree of your field shall not yield its fruit.
And if after this ye should walk perversely, and not be willing to obey me, I will further bring upon you seven plagues according to your sins.
And I will send upon you the wild beasts of the land, and they shall devour you, and shall consume your cattle: and I will make you few in number, and your ways shall be desolate.
And if hereupon ye are not corrected, but walk perversely towards me,
I also will walk with you with a perverse spirit, and I also will smite you seven times for your sins.
And I will bring upon you a sword avenging the cause of my covenant, and ye shall flee for refuge to your cities; and I will send out death against you, and ye shall be delivered into the hands of your enemies.
When I afflict you with famine of bread, then ten women shall bake your loaves in one oven, and they shall render your loaves by weight; and ye shall eat, and not be satisfied.
And if hereupon ye will not obey me, but walk perversely towards me,
then will I walk with you with a froward mind, and I will chasten you seven-fold according to your sins.
And ye shall eat the flesh of your sons, and the flesh of your daughters shall ye eat.
And I will render your pillars desolate, and will utterly destroy your wooden images made with hands; and I will lay your carcases on the carcases of your idols, and my soul shall loathe you.
Ye are the children of the Lord your God: ye shall not make any baldness between you eyes for the dead.
For thou art a holy people to the Lord thy God, and the Lord thy God has chosen thee to be a peculiar people to himself of all the nations on the face of the earth.
Ye shall not eat any abominable thing.
These are the beasts which ye shall eat; the calf of the herd, and lamb of the sheep, and kid of the goats;
the stag, and doe, and pygarg, and wild goat, and camelopard.
Every beast that divides the hoofs, and makes claws of two divisions, and that chews the cud among beasts, these ye shall eat.
And these ye shall not eat of them that chew the cud, and of those that divide the hoofs, and make distinct claws; the camel, and the hare, and the rabbit; because they chew the cud, and do not divide the hoof, these are unclean to you.
And as for the swine, because he divides the hoof, and makes claws of the hoof, yet he chews not the cud, he is unclean to you; ye shall not eat of their flesh, ye shall not touch their dead bodies.
And these ye shall eat of all that are in the water, ye shall eat all that have fins and scales.
And all that have not fins and scales ye shall not eat; they are unclean to you.
Ye shall eat every clean bird.
And these of them ye shall not eat; the eagle, and the ossifrage, and the sea-eagle,
and the vulture, and the kite and the like to it,
and the sparrow, and the owl, and the seamew,
and the heron, and the swan, and the stork,
and the cormorant, and the hawk, and its like, and the hoopoe, and the raven,
and the pelican, and the diver and the like to it, and the red-bill and the bat.
All winged animals that creep are unclean to you; ye shall not eat of them.
Ye shall eat every clean bird.
Ye shall eat nothing that dies of itself; it shall be given to the sojourner in thy cities and he shall eat it, or thou shalt sell it to a stranger, because thou art a holy people to the Lord thy God. Thou shalt not boil a lamb in his mother's milk.
Thou shalt tithe a tenth of all the produce of thy seed, the fruit of thy field year by year.
And thou shalt eat it in the place which the Lord thy God shall choose to have his name called there; ye shall bring the tithe of thy corn and of thy wine, and of thine oil, the first-born of thy herd and of thy flock, that thou mayest learn to fear the Lord thy God always.
And if the journey be too far for thee, and thou art not able to bring them, because the place is far from thee which the Lord thy God shall choose to have his name called there, because the Lord thy God will bless thee;
then thou shalt sell them for money, and thou shalt take the money in thy hands, and thou shalt go to the place which the Lord thy God shall choose.
And thou shalt give the money for whatsoever thy soul shall desire, for oxen or for sheep, or for wine, or thou shalt lay it out on strong drink, or on whatsoever thy soul may desire, and thou shalt eat there before the Lord thy God, and thou shalt rejoice and thy house,
and the Levite that is in thy cities, because he has not a portion or inheritance with thee.
After three years thou shalt bring out all the tithes of thy fruits, in that year thou shalt lay it up in thy cities.
And the Levite shall come, because he has no part or lot with thee, and the stranger, and the orphan, and the widow which is in thy cities; and they shall eat and be filled, that the Lord thy God may bless thee in all the works which thou shalt do.
The one basket was full of very good figs, as the early figs; and the other basket was full of very bad figs, which could not be eaten, for their badness.
And the Lord said to me, What seest thou, Jeremias? and I said, Figs; the good figs, very good; and the bad, very bad, which cannot be eaten, for their badness.
And the word of the Lord came to me, saying,
Thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel; As these good figs, so will I acknowledge the Jews that have been carried away captive, whom I have sent forth out of this place into the land of the Chaldeans for good.
And I will fix mine eyes upon them for good, and I will restore them into this land for good: and I will build them up, and not pull them down; and I will plant them, and not pluck them up.
And I will give them a heart to know me, that I am the Lord: and they shall be to me a people, and I will be to them a God: for they shall turn to me with all their heart.
And as the bad figs, which cannot be eaten, for their badness; thus saith the Lord, So will I deliver Sedekias king of Juda, and his nobles, and the remnant of Jerusalem, them that are left in this land, and the dwellers in Egypt.
And I will cause them to be dispersed into all the kingdoms of the earth, and they shall be for a reproach, and a proverb, and an object of hatred, and a curse, in every place whither I have driven them out.
And I will send against them famine, and pestilence, and the sword, until they are consumed from off the land which I gave them.
And it came to pass when the judges ruled, that there was a famine in the land: and a man went from Bethleem Juda to sojourn in the land of Moab, he, and his wife, and his two sons.
And the man's name was Elimelech, and his wife's name Noemin, and the names of his two sons Maalon and Chelaion, Ephrathites of Bethleem of Juda: and they came to the land of Moab, and remained there.
And Elimelech the husband of Noemin died; and she was left, and her two sons.
And they took to themselves wives, women of Moab; the name of the one was Orpha, and the name of the second Ruth; and they dwelt there about ten years.
And both Maalon and Chelaion died also; and the woman was left of her husband and her two sons.
And she rose up and her two daughters-in-law, and they returned out of the country of Moab, for she heard in the country of Moab that the Lord had visited his people to give them bread.
And she went forth out of the place where she was, and her two daughters-in-law with her: and they went by the way to return to the land of Juda.
And Noemin said to her daughter-in-law, Go now, return each to the house of her mother: the Lord deal mercifully with you, as ye have dealt with the dead, and with me.
The Lord grant you that ye may find rest each of you in the house of her husband: and she kissed them; and they lifted up their voice, and wept.
And they said to her, We will return with thee to thy people.
And Noemin said, Return now, my daughters; and why do ye go with me? have I yet sons in my womb to be your husbands?
Turn now, my daughters, for I am too old to be married: for I said, Suppose I were married, and should bear sons;
would ye wait for them till they should be grown? or would ye refrain from being married for their sakes? Not so, my daughters; for I am grieved for you, that the hand of the Lord has gone forth against me.
And they lifted up their voice, and wept again; and Orpha kissed her mother-in-law and returned to her people; but Ruth followed her.
And Noemin said to Ruth, Behold, thy sister-in-law has returned to her people and to her gods; turn now thou also after thy sister-in-law.
And Ruth said, Intreat me not to leave thee, or to return from following thee; for whithersoever thou goest, I will go, and wheresoever thou lodgest, I will lodge; thy people shall be my people, and thy God my God.
And wherever thou diest, I will die, and there will I be buried: the Lord do so to me, and more also, if I leave thee, for death only shall divide between me and thee.
And Noemin seeing that she was determined to go with her, ceased to speak to her any more.
And they went both of them until they came to Bethleem: and it came to pass, when they arrived at Bethleem, that all the city rang with them, and they said, Is this Noemin?
And she said to them, Nay, do not call me Noemin; call me 'Bitter,' for the Mighty One has dealt very bitterly with me.
I went out full, and the Lord has brought me back empty: and why call ye me Noemin, whereas the Lord has humbled me and the Mighty One has afflicted me?
So Noemin and Ruth the Moabitess, her daughter-in-law, returned from the country of Moab; and they came to Bethleem in the beginning of barley harvest.
The Lord hear thee in the day of trouble; the name of the God of Jacob defend thee.
Send thee help from the sanctuary, and aid thee out of Sion.
Remember all thy sacrifice, and enrich thy whole-burnt-offering. Pause.
Grant thee according to thy heart, and fulfill all thy desire.
We will exult in thy salvation, and in the name of our God shall we be magnified: the Lord fulfil all thy petitions.
Now I know that the Lord has saved his Christ: he shall hear him from his holy heaven: the salvation of his right hand is mighty.
Some glory in chariots, and some in horses: but we will glory in the name of the Lord our God.
They are overthrown and fallen: but we are risen, and have been set upright.
O Lord, save the king: and hear us in whatever day we call upon thee.
These are the miscellaneous instructions of Solomon, which the friends of Ezekias king of Judea copied out.
The glory of God conceals a matter: but the glory of a king honours business.
Heaven is high, and earth is deep, and a king's heart is unsearchable.
Beat the drossy silver, and it shall be made entirely pure.
Slay the ungodly from before the king, and his throne shall prosper in righteousness.
Be not boastful in the presence of the king, and remain not in the places of princes;
for it is better for thee that it should be said, Come up to me, than that one should humble thee in the presence of the prince; speak of that which thine eyes have seen.
Get not suddenly into a quarrel, lest thou repent at last.
Whenever thy friend shall reproach thee, retreat backward, despise him not;
lest thy friend continue to reproach thee, so thy quarrel and enmity shall not depart, but shall be to thee like death. Favour and friendship set a man free, which do thou keep for thyself, lest thou be made liable to reproach; but take heed to thy ways peaceably.
As a golden apple in a necklace of sardius, so is it to speak a wise word.
In an ear-ring of gold a precious sardius is also set; so is a wise word to an obedient ear.
As a fall of snow in the time of harvest is good against heat, so a faithful messenger refreshes those that send him; for he helps the souls of his employers.
As winds and clouds and rains are most evident objects, so is he that boasts of a false gift.
In long-suffering is prosperity to kings, and a soft tongue breaks the bones.
Having found honey, eat only what is enough, lest haply thou be filled, and vomit it up.
Enter sparingly into thy friend's house, lest he be satiated with thy company, and hate thee.
As a club, and a dagger, and a pointed arrow, so also is a man who bears false witness against his friend.
The way of the wicked and the foot of the transgressor shall perish in an evil day.
As vinegar is bad for a sore, so trouble befalling the body afflicts the heart. As a moth in a garment, and a worm in wood, so the grief of a man hurts the heart.
If thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him drink;
for so doing thou shalt heap coals of fire upon his head, and the Lord shall reward thee with good.
The north wind raises clouds; so an impudent face provokes the tongue.
It is better to dwell on a corner of the roof, than with a railing woman in an open house.
As cold water is agreeable to a thirsting soul, so is a good message from a land far off.
As if one should stop a well, and corrupt a spring of water, so is it unseemly for a righteous man to fall before an ungodly man.
It is not good to eat much honey; but it is right to honour venerable sayings.
As a city whose walls are broken down, and which is unfortified, so is a man who does anything without counsel.
Hearken, I pray you, and hear: will they not speak thus, There is no man that repents of his wickedness, saying, What have I done? the runner has failed from his course, as a tired horse in his neighing.
Yea, the stork in the heaven knows her time, also the turtle-dove and wild swallow; the sparrows observe the times of their coming in; but this my people knows not the judgments of the Lord.
Behold, there is a sound of the cry of the daughter of my people from a land afar off: Is not the Lord in Sion? is there not a king there? because they have provoked me with their graven images, and with strange vanities.
For the breach of the daughter of my people I have been saddened: in my perplexity pangs have seized upon me as of a woman in travail.
And is there no balm in Galaad, or is there no physician there? why has not the healing of the daughter of my people taken place?
O God, my God, I cry to thee early; my soul has thirsted for thee: how often has my flesh longed after thee, in a barren and trackless and dry land!
Thus have I appeared before thee in the sanctuary, that I might see thy power and thy glory.
For thy mercy is better than life: my lips shall praise thee.
Thus will I bless thee during my life: I will lift up my hands in thy name.
Let my soul be filled as with marrow and fatness; and my joyful lips shall praise thy name.
Forasmuch as I have remembered thee on my bed: in the early seasons I have meditated on thee.
For thou hast been my helper, and in the shelter of thy wings will I rejoice.
My soul has kept very close behind thee: thy right hand has upheld me.
But they vainly sought after my soul; they shall go into the lowest parts o the earth.
They shall be delivered up to the power of the sword; they shall be portions for foxes.
But the king shall rejoice in God; every one that swears by him shall be praised; for the mouth of them that speak unjust things has been stopped.
Blessed are all they that fear the Lord; who walk in his ways.
Thou shalt eat the labours of thy hands: blessed art thou, and it shall be well with thee.
Thy wife shall be as a fruitful vine on the sides of thy house: thy children as young olive-plants round about thy table.
Behold, thus shall the man be blessed that fears the Lord.
May the Lord bless thee out of Sion; and mayest thou see the prosperity of Jerusalem all the days of thy life.
And mayest thou see thy children's children. Peace be upon Israel.
I beheld until the thrones were set, and the Ancient of days sat; and his raiment was white as snow, and the hair of his head, as pure wool: his throne was a flame of fire, and his wheels burning fire.
A stream of fire rushed forth before him: thousand thousands ministered to him, and ten thousands of myriads, attended upon him: the judgment sat, and the books were opened.
I beheld then because of the voice of the great words which that horn spoke, until the wild beast was slain and destroyed, and his body given to be burnt with fire.
And the dominion of the rest of the wild beasts was taken away; but a prolonging of life was given them for certain times.
I beheld in the night vision, and, lo, one coming with the clouds of heaven as the Son of man, and he came on to the Ancient of days, and was brought near to him.
And to him was given the dominion, and the honour, and the kingdom; and all nations, tribes, and languages, shall serve him: his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom shall not be destroyed.
As for me Daniel, my spirit in my body trembled, and the visions of my head troubled me.
And in that day thou shalt say, I will bless thee, O Lord; for thou wast angry with me, but thou hast turned aside thy wrath, and hast pitied me.
Behold, my God is my Saviour; I will trust in him, and not be afraid: for the Lord is my glory and my praise, and is become my salvation.
Draw ye therefore water with joy out of the wells of salvation.
And in that day thou shalt say, sing to the Lord, call aloud upon his name, proclaim his glorious deeds among the Gentiles; make mention that his name is exalted.
Sing praise to the name of the Lord; for he has done great things: declare this in all the earth.
Exalt and rejoice, ye that dwell in Sion: for the Holy One of Israel is exalted in the midst of her.
And it came to pass after the death of Joshua, that the children of Israel enquired of the Lord, saying, Who shall go up for us first against the Chananites, to fight against them?
And the Lord said, Judas shall go up: behold, I have delivered the land into his hand.
And Judas said to his brother Symeon, Come up with me into my lot, and let us array ourselves against the Chananites, and I also will go with thee into thy lot: and Symeon went with him.
And Judas went up; and the Lord delivered the Chananite and the Pherezite into their hands, and they smote them in Bezek to the number of ten thousand men.
And they overtook Adonibezek in Bezek, and fought against him; and they smote the Chananite and the Pherezite.
And Adonibezek fled, and they pursued after him, and took him, and cut off his thumbs and his great toes.
And Adonibezek said, Seventy kings, having their thumbs and their great toes cut off, gathered their food under my table: as I therefore have done, so God has recompensed me: and they brought him to Jerusalem, and he died there.
And the children of Judas fought against Jerusalem, and took it, and smote with the edge of the sword, and they burnt the city with fire.
And afterwards the children of Judas went down to fight with the Chananite dwelling in the hill country, and the south, and the plain country.
And Judas went to the Chananite who dwelt in Chebron; and Chebron came out against him; and the name of Chebron before was Cariatharbocsepher: and they smote Sessi, and Achiman, and Tholmi, children of Enac.
And they went up thence to the inhabitants of Dabir; but the name of Dabir was before Cariathsepher, the city of Letters.
And Chaleb said, Whosoever shall smite the city of Letters, and shall first take it, I will give to him Ascha my daughter to wife.
And Gothoniel the younger son of Kenez the brother of Chaleb took it; and Chaleb gave him his daughter Ascha to wife.
And it came to pass as she went in, that Gothoniel urged her to ask a field of her father; and she murmured and cried from off her ass, Thou hast sent me forth into a south land: and Chaleb said to her, What is thy request?
And Ascha said to him, Give me, I pray thee, a blessing, for thou hast sent me forth into a south land, and thou shalt give me the ransom of water: and Chaleb gave her according to her heart the ransom of the upper springs and the ransom of the low springs.
And the children of Jothor the Kenite the father-in-law of Moses went up from the city of palm-trees with the children of Judas, to the wilderness that is in the south of Juda, which is at the descent of Arad, and they dwelt with the people.
And Judas went with Symeon his brother, and smote the Chananite that inhabited Sepheth, and they utterly destroyed them; and they called the name of the city Anathema.
But Judas did not inherit Gaza nor her coasts, nor Ascalon nor her coasts, nor Accaron nor her coasts, nor Azotus nor the lands around it.
And the Lord was with Judas, and he inherited the mountain; for they were not able to destroy the inhabitants of the valley, for Rechab prevented them.
And they gave Chebron to Chaleb, as Moses said; and thence he inherited the three cities of the children of Enac.
But the children of Benjamin did not take the inheritance of the Jebusite who dwelt in Jerusalem; and the Jebusite dwelt with the children of Benjamin in Jerusalem until this day.
And the sons of Joseph, they also went up to Baethel; and the Lord was with them.
And they encamped and surveyed Baethel: and the name of the city before was Luza.
And the spies looked, and behold, a man went out of the city, and they took him; and they said to him, Shew us the way into the city, and we will deal mercifully with thee.
And he shewed them the way into the city; and they smote the city with the edge of the sword; but they let go the man and his family.
And the man went into the land of Chettin, and built there a city, and called the name of it Luza; this is its name until this day.
And Manasse did not drive out the inhabitants of Baethsan, which is a city of Scythians, nor her towns, nor her suburbs; nor Thanac, nor her towns; nor the inhabitants of Dor, nor her suburbs, nor her towns; nor the inhabitant of Balac, nor her suburbs, nor her towns; nor the inhabitants of Magedo, nor her suburbs, nor her towns; nor the inhabitants of Jeblaam, nor her suburbs, nor her towns; and the Chananite began to dwell in this land.
And it came to pass when Israel was strong, that he made the Chananite tributary, but did not utterly drive them out.
And Ephraim did not drive out the Chananite that dwelt in Gazer; and the Chananite dwelt in the midst of him in Gazer, and became tributary.
And Zabulon did not drive out the inhabitants of Kedron, nor the inhabitants of Domana: and the Chananite dwelt in the midst of them, and became tributary to them.
And Aser did not drive out the inhabitants of Accho, and that people became tributary to him, nor the inhabitants of Dor, nor the inhabitants of Sidon, nor the inhabitants of Dalaph, nor Aschazi, nor Chebda, nor Nai, nor Ereo.
And Aser dwelt in the midst of the Chananite who inhabited the land, for he could not drive him out.
And Nephthali did not drive out the inhabitants of Baethsamys, nor the inhabitants of Baethanach; and Nephthali dwelt in the midst of the Chananite who inhabited the land: but the inhabitants of Bethsamys and of Baetheneth became tributary to them.
And the Amorite drove out the children of Dan into the mountains, for they did not suffer them to come down into the valley.
And the Amorite began to dwell in the mountain of shells, in which are bears, and foxes, in Myrsinon, and in Thalabin; and the hand of the house of Joseph was heavy upon the Amorite, and he became tributary to them.
And the border of the Amorite was from the going up of Acrabin, from the rock and upwards.
And Israel departed, he and all that he had, and came to the well of the oath; and he offered sacrifice to the God of his father Isaac.
And God spoke to Israel in a night vision, saying, Jacob, Jacob; and he said, What is it?
And Jacob rose up from the well of the oath; and the sons of Israel took up their father, and the baggage, and their wives on the waggons, which Joseph sent to take them.
And they took up their goods, and all their property, which they had gotten in the land of Chanaan; they came into the land of Egypt, Jacob, and all his seed with him.
The sons, and the sons of his sons with him; daughters, and the daughters of his daughters; and he brought all his seed into Egypt.
And there were sons born to Joseph in the land of Egypt, whom Aseneth, the daughter of Petephres, priest of Heliopolis, bore to him, Manasses and Ephraim. And there were sons born to Manasses, which the Syrian concubine bore to him, Machir. And Machir begot Galaad. And the sons of Ephraim, the brother of Manasses; Sutalaam, and Taam. And the sons of Sutalaam; Edom.
and the sons of Benjamin; Bala, and Bochor, and Asbel. And the sons of Bala were Gera, and Noeman, and Anchis, and Ros, and Mamphim. And Gera begot Arad.
These the sons of Rachel, which she bore to Jacob; all the souls eighteen.
And the sons of Joseph, who were born to him in the land of Egypt, were nine souls; all the souls of the house of Jacob who came with Joseph into Egypt, were seventy-five souls.
And he sent Judas before him to Joseph, to meet him to the city of Heroes, into the land of Ramesses.
And Joseph having made ready his chariots, went up to meet Israel his father, at the city of Heroes; and having appeared to him, fell on his neck, and wept with abundant weeping.
Woe to them! for they have started aside from me: they are cowards; for they have sinned against me: yet I redeemed them, but they spoke falsehoods against me.
And their hearts did not cry to me, but they howled on their beds: they pined for oil and wine.
They were instructed by me, and I strengthened their arms; and they devised evils against me.
They turned aside to that which is not, they became as a bent bow: their princes shall fall by the sword, by reason of the unbridled state of their tongue: this is their setting at nought in the land of Egypt.
And all the tribes of Israel come to David to Chebron, and they said to him, Behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh.
And heretofore Saul being king over us, thou was he that didst lead out and bring in Israel: and the Lord said to thee, Thou shalt feed my people Israel, and thou shalt be for a leader to my people Israel.
And all the elders of Israel come to the king to Chebron; and king David made a covenant with them in Chebron before the Lord; and they anoint David king over all Israel.
David was thirty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned forty years.
Seven years and six months he reigned in Chebron over Juda, and thirty-three years he reigned over all Israel and Juda in Jerusalem.
And David and his men, departed to Jerusalem, to the Jebusite that inhabited the land: and it was said to David, Thou shalt not come in hither: for the blind and the lame withstood him, saying, David shall not come in hither.
And David took first the hold of Sion: this is the city of David.
And David said on that day, Every one that smites the Jebusite, let him attack with the dagger both the lame and the blind, and those that hate the soul of David. Therefore they say, The lame and the blind shall not enter into the house of the Lord.
And David dwelt in the hold, and it was called the city of David, and he built the city itself round about from the citadel, and he built his own house.
And David advanced and became great, and the Lord Almighty was with him.
And Chiram king of Tyre sent messengers to David, and cedar wood, and carpenters, and stone-masons: and they built a house for David.
And David knew that the Lord had prepared him to be king over Israel, and that his kingdom was exalted for the sake of his people Israel.
And David took again wives and concubines out of Jerusalem, after he came from Chebron: and David had still more sons and daughters born to him.
And these are the names of those that were born to him in Jerusalem; Sammus, and Sobab, and Nathan, and Solomon.
And Ebear, and Elisue, and Naphec, and Jephies.
And Elisama, and Elidae, and Eliphalath, Samae, Jessibath, Nathan, Galamaan, Jebaar, Theesus, Eliphalat, Naged, Naphec, Janathan, Leasamys, Baalimath, Eliphaath.
And the Philistines heard that David was anointed king over Israel; and all the Philistines went up to seek David; and David heard of it, and went down to the strong hold.
And the Philistines came, and assembled in the valley of the giants.
And David enquired of the Lord, saying, Shall I go up against the Philistines? and wilt thou deliver them into my hands? and the Lord said to David, Go up, for I will surely deliver the Philistines into thine hands.
And David came from Upper Breaches, and smote the Philistines there: and David said, The Lord has destroyed the hostile Philistines before me, as water is dispersed; therefore the name of that place was called Over Breaches.
And they leave there their gods, and David and his men with him took them.
And the Philistines came up yet again, and assembled in the valley of Giants.
And David enquired of the Lord: and the Lord said, Thou shalt not go up to meet them: turn from them, and thou shalt meet them near the place of weeping.
And it shall come to pass when thou hearest the sound of a clashing together from the grove of weeping, then thou shalt go down to them, for then the Lord shall go forth before thee to make havoc in the battle with the Philistines.
And David did as the Lord commanded him, and smote the Philistines from Gabaon as far as the land of Gazera.
And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying,
Sanctify to me every first-born, first produced, opening every womb among the children of Israel both of man and beast: it is mine.
And Moses said to the people, Remember this day, in which ye came forth out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage, for with a strong hand the Lord brought you forth thence; and leaven shall not be eaten.
For on this day ye go forth in the month of new corn.
And it shall come to pass when the Lord thy God shall have brought thee into the land of the Chananites, and the Chettites, and Amorites, and Evites, and Jebusites, and Gergesites, and Pherezites, which he sware to thy fathers to give thee, a land flowing with milk and honey, that thou shalt perform this service in this month.
Six days ye shall eat unleavened bread, and on the seventh day is a feast to the Lord.
Seven days shall ye eat unleavened bread; nothing leavened shall be seen with thee, neither shalt thou have leaven in all thy borders.
And thou shalt tell thy son in that day, saying, Therefore the Lord dealt thus with me, as I was going out of Egypt.
And it shall be to thee a sign upon thy hand and a memorial before thine eyes, that the law of the Lord may be in thy mouth, for with a strong hand the Lord God brought thee out of Egypt.
And preserve ye this law according to the times of the seasons, from year to year.
And it shall come to pass when the Lord thy God shall bring thee into the land of the Chananites, as he sware to thy fathers, and shall give it thee,
that thou shalt set apart every offspring opening the womb, the males to the Lord, every one that opens the womb out of the herds or among thy cattle, as many as thou shalt have: thou shalt sanctify the males to the Lord.
Every offspring opening the womb of the ass thou shalt change for a sheep; and if thou wilt not change it, thou shalt redeem it: every first-born of man of thy sons shalt thou redeem.
And if thy son should ask thee hereafter, saying, What is this? then thou shalt say to him, With a strong hand the Lord brought us out of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.
And when Pharao hardened his heart so as not to send us away, he slew every first-born in the land of Egypt, both the first-born of man and the first-born of beast; therefore do I sacrifice every offspring that opens the womb, the males to the Lord, and every first-born of my sons I will redeem.
And it shall be for a sign upon thy hand, and immovable before thine eyes, for with a strong hand the Lord brought thee out of Egypt.
And when Pharao sent forth the people, God led them not by the way of the land of the Phylistines, because it was near; for God said, Lest at any time the people repent when they see war, and return to Egypt.
And God led the people round by the way to the wilderness, to the Red Sea: and in the fifth generation the children of Israel went up out of the land of Egypt.
And Moses took the bones of Joseph with him, for he had solemnly adjured the children of Israel, saying, God will surely visit you, and ye shall carry up my bones hence with you.
And the children of Israel departed from Socchoth, and encamped in Othom by the wilderness.
And God led them, in the day by a pillar of cloud, to show them the way, and in the night by a pillar of fire.
And the pillar of cloud failed not by day, nor the pillar of fire by night, before all the people.
The transgressor, that he may sin, says within himself, that there is no fear of God before his eyes.
For he has dealt craftily before him, to discover his iniquity and hate it.
The words of his mouth are transgression and deceit: he is not inclined to understand how to do good.
He devises iniquity on his bed; he gives himself to every evil way; and does not abhor evil.
O Lord, thy mercy is in the heaven; and thy truth reaches to the clouds.
Thy righteousness is as the mountains of God, thy judgments are as a great deep: O Lord, thou wilt preserve men and beasts.
How hast thou multiplied thy mercy, O God! so the children of men shall trust in the shelter of thy wings.
They shall be fully satisfied with the fatness of thine house; and thou shalt cause them to drink of the full stream of thy delights.
For with thee is the fountain of life: in thy light we shall see light.
Extend thy mercy to them that know thee; and thy righteousness to the upright in heart.
Let not the foot of pride come against me, and let not the hand of sinners move me.
There have all the workers of iniquity fallen: they are cast out, and shall not be able to stand.
And it came to pass when David and his men had entered Sekelac on the third day, that Amalec had made an incursion upon the south, and upon Sekelac, and smitten Sekelac, and burnt it with fire.
And as to the women and all things that were in it, great and small, they slew neither man nor woman, but carried them captives, and went on their way.
And David and his men came into the city, and, behold, it was burnt with fire; and their wives, and their sons, and their daughters were carried captive.
And David and his men lifted up their voice, and wept till there was no longer any power within them to weep.
And both the wives of David were carried captive, Achinaam, the Jezraelitess, and Abigaia the wife of Nabal the Carmelite.
And David was greatly distressed, because the people spoke of stoning him, because the soul of all the people was grieved, each for his sons and his daughters: but David strengthened himself in the Lord his God.
And David said to Abiathar the priest the son of Achimelech, Bring near the ephod.
And David enquired of the Lord, saying, Shall I pursue after this troop? shall I overtake them? and he said to him, Pursue, for thou shalt surely overtake them, and thou shalt surely rescue the captives.
So David went, he an the six hundred men with him, an they come as far as the brook Bosor, and the superfluous ones stopped.
And he pursued them with four hundred men; and there remained behind two hundred men, who tarried on the other side of the brook Bosor.
And they find an Egyptian in the field, and they take him, and bring him to David; and they gave him bread and he ate, and they caused him to drink water.
And they gave him a piece of a cake of figs, and he ate, and his spirit was restored in him; for he had not eaten bread, and had not drunk water three days and three nights.
And David said to him, Whose art thou? and whence art thou? and the young man the Egyptian said, I am the servant of an Amalekite; and my master left me, because I was taken ill three days ago.
And we made an incursion on the south of the Chelethite, and on the parts of Judea, and on the south of Chelub, and we burnt Sekelac with fire.
And David said to him, Wilt thou bring me down to this troop? And he said, Swear now to me by God, that thou wilt not kill me, and that thou wilt not deliver me into the hands of my master, and I will bring thee down upon this troop.
So be brought him down thither, and behold, they were scattered abroad upon the surface of the whole land, eating and drinking, and feasting by reason of all the great spoils which they had taken out of the land of the Philistines, and out of the land of Juda.
And David came upon them, and smote them from the morning till the evening, and on the next day; and not one of them escaped, except four hundred young men, who were mounted on camels, and fled.
And David recovered all that the Amalekites had taken, and he rescued both his wives.
And nothing was wanting to them of great or small, either of the spoils, or the sons and daughters, or anything that they had taken of theirs; and David recovered all.
And he took all the flocks, and the herds, and led them away before the spoils: and it was said of these spoils, These are the spoils of David.
And David comes to the two hundred men who were left behind that they should not follow after David, and he had caused them to remain by the brook of Bosor; and they came forth to meet David, and to meet his people with him: and David drew near to the people, and they asked him how he did.
Then every ill-disposed and bad man of the soldiers who had gone with David, answered and said, Because they did not pursue together with us, we will not give them of the spoils which we have recovered, only let each one lead away with him his wife and his children, and let them return.
And David said, Ye shall not do so, after the Lord has delivered the enemy to us, and guarded us, and the Lord has delivered into our hands the troop that came against u.
And who will hearken to these your words? for they are not inferior to us; for according to the portion of him that went down to the battle, so shall be the portion of him that abides with the baggage; they shall share alike.
And it came to pass from that day forward, that it became an ordinance and a custom in Israel until this day.
And David came to Sekelac, and sent of the spoils to the elders of Juda, and to his friends, saying, Behold some of the spoils of the enemies of the Lord;
to those in Baethsur, and to those in Rama of the south, and to those in Gethor.
And to those in Aroer, and to those in Ammadi, and to those in Saphi, and to those in Esthie,
and to those in Geth, and to those in Cimath, and to those in Saphec, and to those in Themath, and to those in Carmel, and to those in the cities of Jeremeel, and to those in the cities of the Kenezite;
and to those in Jerimuth, and to those in Bersabee, and to those in Nombe,
and to those in Chebron, and to all the places which David and his men had passed through.
And his three friends also ceased any longer to answer Job: for Job was righteous before them.
Then Elius the son of Barachiel, the Buzite, of the kindred of Ram, of the country of Ausis, was angered: and he was very angry with Job, because he justified himself before the Lord.
And he was also very angry with his three friends, because they were not able to return answers to Job, yet set him down for an ungodly man.
But Elius had forborne to give an answer to Job, because they were older than he.
And Elius the Buzite the son of Barachiel answered and said, I am younger in age, and ye are elder, wherefore I kept silence, fearing to declare to you my own knowledge.
And I said, It is not time that speaks, though in many years men know wisdom:
but there is a spirit in mortals; and the inspiration of the Almighty is that which teaches.
The long-lived are not wise as such; neither do the aged know judgment.
Wherefore I said, Hear me, and I will tell you what I know.
Hearken to my words; for I will speak in your hearing, until ye shall have tried the matter with words:
lest ye should say, We have found that we have added wisdom to the Lord.
And ye have commissioned a man to speak such words.
And Elius continued, and said, I will again speak,
for I am full of words, for the spirit of my belly destroys me.
And my belly is as a skin of sweet wine, bound up and ready to burst; or as a brazier's labouring bellows.
I will speak, that I may open my lips and relieve myself.
For truly I will not be awed because of man, nor indeed will I be confounded before a mortal.
For I know not how to respect persons: and if otherwise, even the moths would eat me.
Thus saith the Lord God to my anointed Cyrus, whose right hand I have held, that nations might be obedient before him; and I will break through the strength of kings; I will open doors before him, and cities shall not be closed.
I will go before thee, and will level mountains: I will break to pieces brazen doors, and burst iron bars.
And I will give thee the treasures of darkness, I will open to thee hidden, unseen treasures, that thou mayest know that I, the Lord thy God, that call thee by name, am the God of Israel.
For the sake of my servant Jacob, and Israel mine elect, I will call thee by thy name, and accept thee: but thou hast not known me.
For I am the Lord God, and there is no other God beside me; I strengthened thee, and thou hast not known me.
That they that come from the east and they that come from the west may know that there is no God but me. I am the Lord God, and there is none beside.
I am he that prepared light, and formed darkness; who make peace, and create evil; I am the Lord God, that does all these things.
Let the heaven rejoice from above, and let the clouds rain righteousness: let the earth bring forth, and blossom with mercy, and bring forth righteousness likewise: I am the Lord that created thee.
What excellent thing have I prepared as clay of the potter? Will the ploughman plough the earth all day? shall the clay say to the potter, What art thou doing that thou dost not work, nor hast hands? shall the thing formed answer him that formed it?
As though one should say to his father, What wilt thou beget me? and to his mother, What art thou bringing forth?
For thus saith the Lord God, the Holy One of Israel, who has formed the things that are to come, Enquire of me concerning my sons, and concerning the works of my hands command me.
I have made the earth, and man upon it: I with my hand have established the heaven; I have given commandment to all the stars.
I have raised him up to be a king with righteousness, and all his ways are right: he shall build my city, and shall turn the captivity of my people, not for ransoms, nor for rewards, saith the Lord of hosts.
Thus saith the Lord of hosts, Egypt has laboured for thee; and the merchandise of the Ethiopians, and the Sabeans, men of stature, shall pass over to thee, and shall be thy servants; and they shall follow after thee bound in fetters, and shall pass over to thee, and shall do obeisance to thee, and make supplication to thee: because God is in thee; and there is no God beside thee, O Lord.
For thou art God, yet we knew it not, the God of Israel, the Saviour.
All that are opposed to him shall be ashamed and confounded, and shall walk in shame: ye isles, keep a feast to me.
Israel is saved by the Lord with an everlasting salvation: they shall not be ashamed nor confounded for evermore.
Thus saith the Lord that made the heaven, this God that created the earth, and made it; he marked it out, he made it not in vain, but formed it to be inhabited: I am the Lord, and there is none beside.
I have not spoken in secret, nor in a dark place of the earth: I said not to the seed of Jacob, Seek vanity: I, even I, am the Lord, speaking righteousness, and proclaiming truth.
Assemble yourselves and come; take counsel together, ye that escape of the nations: they that set up wood, even their graven image, have no knowledge, nor they who pray to gods that do not save.
If they will declare, let them draw nigh, that they may know together, who has caused these things to be heard from the beginning: then was it told you. I am God, and there is not another beside me; a just God and a Saviour; there is none but me.
Turn ye to me, and ye shall be saved, ye that come from the end of the earth: I am God, and there is none other.
By myself I swear, righteousness shall surely proceed out of my mouth; my words shall not be frustrated; that to me every knee shall bend, and every tongue shall swear by God,
saying, Righteousness and glory shall come to him: and all that remove them from their borders shall be ashamed.
By the Lord shall they be justified, and in God shall all the seed of the children of Israel be glorified.
Wisdom has built a house for herself, and set up seven pillars.
She has killed her beasts; she has mingled her wine in a bowl, and prepared her table.
She has sent forth her servants, calling with a loud proclamation to the feast, saying,
Whoso is foolish, let him turn aside to me: and to them that want understanding she says,
Come, eat of my bread, and drink wine which I have mingled for you.
Leave folly, that ye may reign for ever; and seek wisdom, and improve understanding by knowledge.
He that reproves evil men shall get dishonour to himself; and he that rebukes an ungodly man shall disgrace himself.
Rebuke not evil men, lest they should hate thee: rebuke a wise man, and he will love thee.
Give an opportunity to a wise man, and he will be wiser: instruct a just man, and he will receive more instruction.
The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and the counsel of saints is understanding: for to know the law is the character of a sound mind.
For in this way thou shalt live long, and years of thy life shall be added to thee.
Son, if thou be wise for thyself, thou shalt also be wise for thy neighbours; and if thou shouldest prove wicked, thou alone wilt bear the evil. He that stays himself upon falsehoods, attempts to rule the winds, and the same will pursue birds in their fight: for he has forsaken the ways of his own vineyard, and he has caused the axles of his own husbandry to go astray; and he goes through a dry desert, and a land appointed to drought, and he gathers barrenness with his hands.
A foolish and bold woman, who knows not modesty, comes to want a morsel.
She sits at the doors of her house, on a seat openly in the streets,
calling to passers by, and to those that are going right on their ways;
saying, Whoso is most senseless of you, let him turn aside to me; and I exhort those that want prudence, saying,
Take and enjoy secret bread, and the sweet water of theft.
But he knows that mighty men die by her, and he falls in with a snare of hell. But hasten away, delay not in the place, neither fix thine eye upon her: for thus shalt thou go through strange water; but do thou abstain from strange water, and drink not of a strange fountain, that thou mayest live long, and years of life may be added to thee.
And thou shalt set him before Eleazar the priest, and thou shalt give him a charge before all the congregation, and thou shalt give a charge concerning him before them.
And thou shalt put of thy glory upon him, that the children of Israel may hearken to him.
And he shall stand before Eleazar the priest, and they shall ask of him before the Lord the judgment of the Urim: they shall go forth at his word, and at his word they shall come in, he and the children of Israel with one accord, and all the congregation.
And Moses did as the Lord commanded him; and he took Joshua, and set him before Eleazar the priest, and before all the congregation.
And he laid his hands on him, and appointed him as the Lord ordered Moses.
But why have the seasons been hidden from the Lord,
while the ungodly have passed over the bound, carrying off the flock with the shepherd?
They have led away, the ass of the fatherless, and taken the widow's ox for a pledge.
They have turned aside the weak from the right way: and the meek of the earth have hidden themselves together.
And they have departed like asses in the field, having gone forth on my account according to their own order: his bread is sweet to his little ones.
They have reaped a field that was not their own before the time: the poor have laboured in the vineyards of the ungodly without pay and without food.
They have caused many naked to sleep without clothes, and they have taken away the covering of their body.
They are wet with the drops of the mountains: they have embraced the rock, because they had no shelter.
They have snatched the fatherless from the breast, and have afflicted the outcast.
And they have wrongfully caused others to sleep without clothing, and taken away the morsel of the hungry.
They have unrighteously laid wait in narrow places, and have not known the righteous way.
Who have cast forth the poor from the city and their own houses, and the soul of the children has groaned aloud.
Why then has he not visited these? forasmuch as they were upon the earth, and took no notice, and they knew not the way of righteousness, neither have they walked in their appointed paths?
But having known their works, he delivered them into darkness: and in the night one will be as a thief:
He is swift on the face of the water: let his portion be cursed on the earth; and let their plants be laid bare.
Let them be withered upon the earth; for they have plundered the sheaves of the fatherless.
Then is his sin brought to remembrance, and he vanishes like a vapour of dew: but let what he has done be recompensed to him, and let every unrighteous one be crushed like rotten wood.
For he has not treated the barren woman well, and has had no pity on a feeble woman.
And in wrath he has overthrown the helpless: therefore when he has arisen, a man will not feel secure of his own life.
When he has fallen sick, let him not hope to recover: but let him perish by disease.
For his exaltation has hurt many; but he has withered as mallows in the heat, or as an ear of corn falling off of itself from the stalk.
But if not, who is he that says I speak falsely, and will make my words of no account?
Then came all the leaders of the host, and Joanan, and Azarias the son of Maasaeas, and all the people great and small,
to Jeremias the prophet, and said to him, Let now our supplication come before thy face, and pray thou to the Lord thy God for this remnant; for we are left few out of many, as thine eyes see.
And let the Lord thy God declare to us the way wherein we should walk, and the thing which we should do.
And Jeremias said to them, I have heard you; behold, I will pray for you to the Lord our God, according to your words; and it shall come to pass, that whatsoever word the Lord God shall answer, I will declare it to you; I will not hide anything from you.
And they said to Jeremias, Let the Lord be between us for a just and faithful witness, if we do not according to every word which the Lord shall send to us.
And whether it be good, or whether it be evil, we will hearken to the voice of the Lord our God, to whom we send thee; that it may be well with us, because we shall hearken to the voice of the Lord our God.
And it came to pass after ten days, that the word of the Lord came to Jeremias.
And he called Joanan, and the leaders of the host, and all the people from the least even to the greatest,
and he said to them, Thus saith the Lord;
If ye will indeed dwell in this land, I will build you, and will not pull you down, but will plant you, and in no wise pluck you up: for I have ceased from the calamities which I brought upon you.
Be not afraid of the king of Babylon, of whom ye are afraid; be not afraid of him, saith the Lord: for I am with you, to deliver you, and save you out of their hand.
And I will grant you mercy, and pity you, and will restore you to your land.
But if ye say, We will not dwell in this land, that we may not hearken to the voice of the Lord;
for we will go into the land of Egypt, and we shall see no war, and shall not hear the sound of a trumpet, and we shall not hunger for bread; and there we will dwell:
then hear the word of the Lord; thus saith the Lord;
If ye set your face toward Egypt, and go in there to dwell; then it shall be, that the sword which ye fear shall find you in the land of Egypt, and the famine to which ye have regard, shall overtake you, coming after you in Egypt; and there ye shall die.
And all the men, and all the strangers who have set their face toward the land of Egypt to dwell there, shall be consumed by the sword, and by the famine: and there shall not one of them escape from the evils which I bring upon them.
For thus saith the Lord; As my wrath has dropped upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so shall my wrath drop upon you, when ye have entered into Egypt: and ye shall be a desolation, and under the power of others, and a curse and a reproach: and ye shall no more see this place.
These are the words which the Lord has spoken concerning you the remnant of Juda; Enter ye not into Egypt: and now know ye for a certainty,
that ye have wrought wickedness in your hearts, when ye sent me, saying, Pray thou for us to the Lord; and according to all that the Lord shall speak to thee we will do.
And ye have not hearkened to the voice of the Lord, with which he sent me to you.
Now therefore ye shall perish by sword and by famine, in the place which ye desire to go into to dwell there.
And the Ziphites come out of the dry country to Saul to the hill, saying, Behold, David hides himself with us in the hill Echela, opposite Jessemon.
And Saul arose, and went down to the wilderness of Ziph, and with him went three thousand men chosen out of Israel, to seek David in the wilderness of Ziph.
And Saul encamped in the hill of Echela in front of Jessemon, by the way, and David dwelt in the wilderness: and David saw that Saul came after him into the wilderness.
And David sent spies, and ascertained that Saul was come prepared out of Keila.
And David arose secretly, and goes into the place where Saul was sleeping, and there was Abenner the son of Ner, the captain of his host: and Saul was sleeping in a chariot, and the people had encamped along round about him.
And David answered and spoke to Abimelech the Chettite, and to Abessa the son Saruia the brother of Joab, saying, Who will go in with me to Saul into the camp? And Abessa said, I will go in with thee.
So David and Abessa go in among the people by night: and behold, Saul was fast asleep in the chariot, and his spear was stuck in the ground near his head, and Abenner and his people slept round about him.
And Abessa said to David, The Lord has this day shut up thine enemy into thine hands, and now I will smite him to the earth with the spear to the ground once for all, and I will not smite him again.
And David said to Abessa, Do not lay him low, for who shall lift up his hand against the anointed of the Lord, and be guiltless?
And David said, As the Lord lives, if the Lord smite him not, or his day come and he die, or he go down to battle and be added to his fathers, do not so.
The Lord forbid it me that I should lift up my hand against the anointed of the Lord: and now take, I pray thee, the spear from his bolster, and the pitcher of water, and let us return home.
So David took the spear, and the pitcher of water from his bolster, and they went home: and there was no one that saw, and no one that knew, and there was no one that awoke, all being asleep, for a stupor from the Lord had fallen upon them.
So David went over to the other side, and stood on the top of a hill afar off, and there was a good distance between them.
And David called to the people, and spoke to Abenner, saying, Wilt thou not answer, Abenner? and Abenner answered and said, Who art thou that callest?
And David said to Abenner, Art not thou a man? and who is like thee in Israel? Why then dost thou not guard thy lord the king? for one out of the people went in to destroy thy lord the king.
And this thing is not good which thou hast done. As the Lord lives, ye are worthy of death, ye who guard your lord the king, the anointed of the Lord: and now behold, I pray you, the spear of the king, and the cruse of water: where are the articles that should be at his head?
And Saul recognized the voice of David, and said, Is this thy voice, son David? and David said, I am thy servant, my lord, O king.
And he said, Why does my lord thus pursue after his servant? for in what have I sinned? and what unrighteousness has been found in me?
And now let my lord the king hear the word of his servant. If God stirs thee up against me, let thine offering be acceptable: but if the sons of men, they are cursed before the Lord, for they have cast me out this day so that I should not be established in the inheritance of the Lord, saying, Go, serve other Gods.
And now let not my blood fall to the ground before the Lord, for the king of Israel has come forth to seek thy life, as the night hawk pursues its prey in the mountains.
And Saul said, I have sinned: turn, son David, for I will not hurt thee, because my life was precious in thine eyes; and to-day I have been foolish and have erred exceedingly.
And David answered and said, Behold, the spear of the king: let one of the servants come over and take it.
And the Lord shall recompense each according to his righteousness and his truth, since the Lord delivered thee this day into my hands, and I would not lift my hand against the Lord's anointed.
And, behold, as thy life has been precious this very day in my eyes, so let my life be precious before the Lord, and may he protect me, and deliver me out of all affliction.
And Saul said to David, Blessed be thou, my son; and thou shalt surely do valiantly, and surely prevail. And David went on his way, and Saul returned to his place.
A Psalm for David on the first day of the week. The earth is the Lord's and the fullness thereof; the world, and all that dwell in it.
He has founded it upon the seas, and prepared it upon the rivers.
Who shall go up to the mountain of the Lord, and who shall stand in his holy place?
He that is innocent in his hands and pure in his heart; who has not lifted up his soul to vanity, nor sworn deceitfully to his neighbour.
He shall receive a blessing from the Lord, and mercy from God his Saviour.
This is the generation of them that seek him, that seek the face of the God of Jacob. Pause.
Lift up your gates, ye princes, and be ye lifted up, ye everlasting doors; and the king of glory shall come in.
Who is this king of Glory? the Lord strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in battle.
Lift up your gates, ye princes; and be ye lift up, ye everlasting doors; and the king of glory shall come in.
Who is this king of glory? The Lord of hosts, he is this king of glory.
And after this went in Moses and Aaron to Pharao, and they said to him, These things says the Lord God of Israel, Send my people away, that they may keep a feast to me in the wilderness.
And Pharao said, Who is he that I should hearken to his voice, so that I should send away the children of Israel? I do not know the Lord, and I will not let Israel go.
And they say to him, The God of the Hebrews has called us to him: we will go therefore a three days' journey into the wilderness, that we may sacrifice to the Lord our God, lest at any time death or slaughter happen to us.
And the king of Egypt said to them, Why do ye, Moses and Aaron, turn the people from their works? depart each of you to your works.
And Pharao said, Behold now, the people is very numerous; let us not then give them rest from their work.
And Pharao gave orders to the task-masters of the people and the accountants, saying,
Ye shall no longer give straw to the people for brick-making as yesterday and the third day; but let them go themselves, and collect straw for themselves.
And thou shalt impose on them daily the rate of brick-making which they perform: thou shalt not abate anything, for they are idle; therefore have they cried, saying, Let us arise and do sacrifice to our God.
Let the works of these men be made grievous, and let them care for these things, and not care for vain words.
And the taskmasters and the accountants hastened them, and they spoke to the people, saying, thus says Pharao, I will give you straw no longer.
Go ye, yourselves, get for yourselves straw whencesoever ye can find it, for nothing is diminished from your rate.
So the people were dispersed in all the land of Egypt, to gather stubble for straw.
and the taskmasters hastened them, saying, Fulfil your regular daily tasks, even as when straw was given you.
And the accountants of the race of the children of Israel, who were set over them by the masters of Pharao, were scourged, [and questioned,] men saying, Why have ye not fulfilled your rates of brick-work as yesterday and the third day, to-day also?
And the accountants of the children of Israel went in and cried to Pharao, saying, Why dost thou act thus to thy servants?
Straw is not given to thy servants, and they tell us to make brick; and behold thy servants have been scourged: thou wilt therefore injure thy people.
And he said to them, Ye are idle, ye are idlers: therefore ye say, Let us go and do sacrifice to our God.
Now then go and work, for straw shall not be given to you, yet ye shall return the rate of bricks.
And the accountants of the children of Israel saw themselves in an evil plight, men saying, Ye shall not fail to deliver the daily rate of the brick-making.
And they met Moses and Aaron coming forth to meet them, as they came forth from Pharao.
And they said to them, The Lord look upon you and judge you, for ye have made our savour abominable before Pharao, and before his servants, to put a sword into his hands to slay us.
And Moses turned to the Lord, and said, I pray, Lord, why hast thou afflicted this people? and wherefore hast thou sent me?
For from the time that I went to Pharao to speak in thy name, he has afflicted this people, and thou hast not delivered thy people.
O Lord, who has believed our report? and to whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed?
We brought a report as of a child before him; he is as a root in a thirsty land: he has no form nor comeliness; and we saw him, but he had no form nor beauty.
But his form was ignoble, and inferior to that of the children of men; he was a man in suffering, and acquainted with the bearing of sickness, for his face is turned from us: he was dishonoured, and not esteemed.
He bears our sins, and is pained for us: yet we accounted him to be in trouble, and in suffering, and in affliction.
But he was wounded on account of our sins, and was bruised because of our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him; and by his bruises we were healed.
All we as sheep have gone astray; every one has gone astray in his way; and the Lord gave him up for our sins.
And he, because of his affliction, opens not his mouth: he was led as a sheep to the slaughter, and as a lamb before the shearer is dumb, so he opens not his mouth.
In his humiliation his judgment was taken away: who shall declare his generation? for his life is taken away from the earth: because of the iniquities of my people he was led to death.
And I will give the wicked for his burial, and the rich for his death; for he practised no iniquity, nor craft with his mouth.
The Lord also is pleased to purge him from his stroke. If ye can give an offering for sin, your soul shall see a long-lived seed:
the Lord also is pleased to take away from the travail of his soul, to shew him light, and to form him with understanding; to justify the just one who serves many well; and he shall bear their sins.
Therefore he shall inherit many, and he shall divide the spoils of the mighty; because his soul was delivered to death: and he was numbered among the transgressors; and he bore the sins of many, and was delivered because of their iniquities.
And the Lord God said to Noe, Enter thou and all thy family into the ark, for thee have I seen righteous before me in this generation.
And of the clean cattle take in to thee sevens, male and female, and of the unclean cattle pairs male and female.
And of clean flying creatures of the sky sevens, male and female, and of all unclean flying creatures pairs, male and female, to maintain seed on all the earth.
pairs went in to Noe into the ark, male and female, as God commanded Noe.
And it came to pass after the seven days that the water of the flood came upon the earth.
In the six hundredth year of the life of Noe, in the second month, on the twenty-seventh day of the month, on this day all the fountains of the abyss were broken up, and the flood-gates of heaven were opened.
And the rain was upon the earth forty days and forty nights.
On that very day entered Noe, Sem, Cham, Japheth, the sons of Noe, and the wife of Noe, and the three wives of his sons with him into the ark.
And they that entered went in male and female of all flesh, as God commanded Noe, and the Lord God shut the ark outside of him.
And the flood was upon the earth forty days and forty nights, and the water abounded greatly and bore up the ark, and it was lifted on high from off the earth.
And the water prevailed and abounded exceedingly upon the earth, and the ark was borne upon the water.
And the water prevailed exceedingly upon the earth, and covered all the high mountains which were under heaven.
Fifteen cubits upwards was the water raised, and it covered all the high mountains.
And there died all flesh that moved upon the earth, of flying creatures and cattle, and of wild beasts, and every reptile moving upon the earth, and every man.
And all things which have the breath of life, and whatever was on the dry land, died.
And blotted out every offspring which was upon the face of the earth, both man and beast, and reptiles, and birds of the sky, and they were blotted out from the earth, and Noe was left alone, and those with him in the ark.
And the water was raised over the earth an hundred and fifty days.
Be not hasty with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be swift to utter anything before God; for God is in heaven above, and thou upon earth: therefore let thy words be few.
For through the multitude of trial a dream comes; and a fool's voice is with a multitude of words.
Whenever thou shalt vow a vow to God, defer not to pay it; for he has no pleasure in fools: pay thou therefore whatsoever thou shalt have vowed.
It is better that thou shouldest not vow, than that thou shouldest vow and not pay.
Suffer not thy mouth to lead thy flesh to sin; and say not in the presence of God, It was an error: lest God be angry at thy voice, and destroy the works of thy hands.
For there is evil in a multitude of dreams and vanities and many words: but fear thou God.
If thou shouldest see the oppression of the poor, and the wresting of judgment and of justice in the land, wonder not at the matter: for there is a high one to watch over him that is high, and high ones over them.
Also the abundance of the earth is for every one: the king is dependent on the tilled field.
He that loves silver shall not be satisfied with silver: and who has loved gain, in the abundance thereof? this is also vanity.
In the multitude of good they are increased that eat it: and what virtue has the owner, but the right of beholding it with his eyes?
The sleep of a servant is sweet, whether he eat little or much: but to one who is satiated with wealth, there is none that suffers him to sleep.
There is an infirmity which I have seen under the sun, namely, wealth kept for its owner to his hurt.
And that wealth shall perish in an evil trouble: and the man begets a son, and there is nothing in his hand.
As he came forth naked from his mother's womb, he shall return back as he came, and he shall receive nothing for his labour, that it should go with him in his hand.
And this is also an evil infirmity: for as he came, so also shall he return: and what is his gain, for which he vainly labours?
Yea, all his days are in darkness, and in mourning, and much sorrow, and infirmity, and wrath.
Behold, I have seen good, that it is a fine thing for a man to eat and to drink, and to see good in all his labour in which he may labour under the sun, all the number of the days of his life which God has given to him: for it is his portion.
Yea, and as for every man to whom God has given wealth and possessions, and has given him power to eat thereof, and to receive his portion, and to rejoice in his labour; this is the gift of God.
For he shall not much remember the days of his life; for God troubles him in the mirth of his heart.
We will give thanks to thee, O God, we will give thanks, and call upon thy name: I will declare all thy wonderful works.
When I shall take a set time, I will judge righteously.
The earth is dissolved, and all that dwell in it: I have strengthened its pillars. Pause.
I said unto the transgressors, Do not transgress; and to the sinners, Lift not up the horn.
Lift not up your horn on high; speak not unrighteousness against God.
For good comes neither from the east, nor from the west, nor from the desert mountains.
For God is the judge; he puts down one, and raises up another.
For there is a cup in the hand of the Lord, full of unmingled wine; and he has turned it from side to side, but its dregs have not been wholly poured out; all the sinners of the earth shall drink them.
But I will exult for ever: I will sing praises to the God of Jacob.
And I will break all the horns of sinners; but the horns of the righteous one shall be exalted.
Strive not with a mighty man' lest thou fall into his hands.
Be not at variance with a rich man, lest he overweigh thee: for gold hath destroyed many, and perverted the hearts of kings.
Strive not with a man that is full of tongue, and heap not wood upon his fire.
Jest not with a rude man, lest thy ancestors be disgraced.
Reproach not a man that turneth from sin, but remember that we are all worthy of punishment.
Dishonour not a man in his old age: for even some of us wax old.
Rejoice not over thy greatest enemy being dead, but remember that we die all.
Despise not the discourse of the wise, but acquaint thyself with their proverbs: for of them thou shalt learn instruction, and how to serve great men with ease.
Miss not the discourse of the elders: for they also learned of their fathers, and of them thou shalt learn understanding, and to give answer as need requireth.
Kindle not the coals of a sinner, lest thou be burnt with the flame of his fire.
Rise not up in anger at the presence of an injurious person, lest he lie in wait to entrap thee in thy words
Lend not unto him that is mightier than thyself; for if thou lendest him, count it but lost.
Be not surety above thy power: for if thou be surety, take care to pay it.
Go not to law with a judge; for they will judge for him according to his honour.
Travel not by the way with a bold fellow, lest he become grievous unto thee: for he will do according to his own will, and thou shalt perish with him through his folly.
Strive not with an angry man, and go not with him into a solitary place: for blood is as nothing in his sight, and where there is no help, he will overthrow thee.
Consult not with a fool; for he cannot keep counsel.
Do no secret thing before a stranger; for thou knowest not what he will bring forth.
Open not thine heart to every man, lest he requite thee with a shrewd turn.
And seven women shall take hold of one man, saying, We will eat our own bread, and wear our own raiment: only let thy name be called upon us, and take away our reproach.
And in that day God shall shine gloriously in counsel on the earth, to exalt and glorify the remnant of Israel.
And it shall be, that the remnant left in Sion, and the remnant left in Jerusalem, even all that are appointed to life in Jerusalem, shall be called holy.
For the Lord shall wash away the filth of the sons and daughters of Sion, and shall purge out the blood from the midst of them, with the spirit of judgment, and the spirit of burning.
And he shall come, and it shall be with regard to every place of mount Sion, yea, all the region round about it shall a cloud overshadow by day, and there shall be as it were the smoke and light of fire burning by night: and upon all the glory shall be a defence.
And it shall be for a shadow from the heat, and as a shelter and a hiding place from inclemency of weather and from rain.
Lord, remember David, and all his meekness:
how he sware to the Lord, and vowed to the God of Jacob, saying,
I will not go into the tabernacle of my house; I will not go up to the couch of my bed;
I will not give sleep to mine eyes, nor slumber to mine eyelids, nor rest to my temples,
until I find a place for the Lord, a tabernacle for the God of Jacob.
Behold, we heard of it in Ephratha; we found it in the fields of the wood.
Let us enter into his tabernacles: let us worship at the place where his feet stood.
Arise, O Lord, into thy rest; thou, and the ark of thine holiness.
Thy priests shall clothe themselves with righteousness; and thy saints shall exult.
For the sake of thy servant David turn not away the face of thine anointed.
The Lord sware in truth to David, and he will not annul it, saying, Of the fruit of thy body will I set a king upon thy throne.
If thy children will deep my covenant, and these my testimonies which I shall teach them, their children also shall sit upon thy throne for ever.
For the Lord has elected Sion, he has chosen her for a habitation for himself, saying,
This is my rest for ever: here will I dwell; for I have chosen it.
I will surely bless her provision: I will satisfy her poor with bread.
I will clothe her priests with salvation; and her saints shall greatly exult.
There will I cause to spring up a horn to David: I have prepared a lamp for mine anointed.
His enemies will I clothe with a shame; but upon himself shall my holiness flourish.
And they fulfilled forty days for him, for so are the days of embalming numbered; and Egypt mourned for him seventy days.
And when the days of mourning were past, Joseph spoke to the princes of Pharao, saying, If I have found favour in your sight, speak concerning me in the ears of Pharao, saying,
Thus say ye to Joseph, Forgive them their injustice and their sin, forasmuch as they have done thee evil; and now pardon the injustice of the servants of the God of thy father. And Joseph wept while they spoke to him.
And they came to him and said, We, these persons, are thy servants.
And Joseph dwelt in Egypt, he and his brethren, and all the family of his father; and Joseph lived a hundred and ten years.
And Joseph saw the children of Ephraim to the third generation; and the sons of Machir the son of Manasse were borne on the sides of Joseph.
And Joseph spoke to his brethren, saying, I die, and God will surely visit you, and will bring you out of this land to the land concerning which God sware to our fathers, Abraam, Isaac, and Jacob.
And he said to his mother, The eleven hundred pieces of silver which thou tookest of thyself, and about which thou cursedst me, and spokest in my ears, behold, the silver is with me; I took it: and his mother said, Blessed be my son of the Lord.
And he restored the eleven hundred pieces of silver to his mother; and his mother said, I had wholly consecrated the money to the Lord out of my hand for my son, to make a graven and a molten image, and now I will restore it to thee.
But he returned the silver to his mother, and his mother took two hundred pieces of silver, and gave them to a silversmith, and he made it a graven and a molten image; and it was in the house of Michaias.
And the house of Michaias was to him the house of God, and he made an ephod and theraphin, and he consecrated one of his sons, and he became to him a priest.
And in those days there was no king in Israel; every man did that which was right in his own eyes.
And there was a young man in Bethleem of the tribe of Juda, and he was a Levite, and he was sojourning there.
And the man departed from Bethleem the city of Juda to sojourn in whatever place he might find; and he came as far as mount Ephraim, and to the house of Michaias to accomplish his journey.
And Michaias said to him, Whence comest thou? and he said to him, I am a Levite of Bethleem Juda, and I go to sojourn in any place I may find.
And Michaias said to him, Dwell with me, and be to me a father and a priest; and I will give thee ten pieces of silver by the year, and a change of raiment, and thy living.
And the Levite went and began to dwell with the man; and the young man was to him as one of his sons.
And Michaias consecrated the Levite, and he became to him a priest, and he was in the house of Michaias.
And Michaias said, Now I know that the Lord will do me good, because a Levite has become my priest.
And it happened after this that Abessalom the son of David had a very beautiful sister, and her name was Themar; and Amnon the son of David loved her.
And Amnon was distressed even to sickness, because of Themar his sister; for she was a virgin, and it seemed very difficult for Amnon to do anything to her.
And Amnon had a friend, and his name was Jonadab, the son of Samaa the brother of David: and Jonadab was a very cunning man.
And he said to him, What ails thee that thou art thus weak? O son of the king, morning by morning? wilt thou not tell me? and Ammon said, I love Themar the sister of my brother Abessalom.
And Jonadab said to him, Lie upon thy bed, and make thyself sick, and thy father shall come in to see thee; and thou shalt say to him, Let, I pray thee, Themar my sister come, and feed me with morsels, and let her prepare food before my eyes, that I may see and eat at her hands.
So Ammon lay down, and made himself sick; and the king came in to see him: and Amnon said to the king, Let, I pray thee, my sister Themar come to me, and make a couple of cakes in my sight, and I will eat them at her hand.
And David sent to Themar to the house, saying, Go now to thy brother's house, and dress him food.
And Themar went to the house of her brother Amnon, and he was lying down: and she took the dough and kneaded it, and made cakes in his sight, and baked the cakes.
And she took the frying pan and poured them out before him, but he would not eat. And Amnon said, Send out every man from about me. And they removed every man from about him.
And Amnon said to Themar, Bring in the food into the closet, and I will eat of thy hand. And Themar took the cakes which she had made, and brought them to her brother Amnon into the chamber.
And she brought them to him to eat, and he caught hold of her, and said to her, Come, lie with me, my sister.
And she said to him, Nay, my brother, do not humble me, for it ought not to be so done in Israel; do not this folly.
And I, whither shall I remove my reproach? and thou shalt be as one of the fools in Israel. And now, speak, I pray thee, to the king, for surely he will not keep me from thee.
But Amnon would not hearken to her voice; and he prevailed against her, and humbled her, and lay with her.
Then Amnon hated her with very great hatred; for the hatred with which he hated her was greater than the love with which he had loved her, for the last wickedness was greater than the first: and Amnon said to her, Rise, and be gone.
And Themar spoke to him concerning this great mischief, greater, said she, than the other that thou didst me, to send me away: but Amnon would not hearken to her voice.
And he called his servant who had charge of the house, and said to him, Put now this woman out from me, and shut the door after her.
And she had on her a variegated robe, for so were the king's daughters that were virgins attired in their apparel: and his servant led her forth, and shut the door after her.
And Themar took ashes, and put them on her head; and she rent the variegated garment that was upon her: and she laid her hands on her head, and went crying continually.
And Abessalom her brother said to her, Has thy brother Amnon been with thee? now then, my sister, be silent, for he is thy brother: be not careful to mention this matter. So Themar dwelt as a widow in the house of her brother Abessalom.
And king David heard of all these things, and was very angry; but he did not grieve the spirit of his son Amnon, because be loved him, for he was his first-born.
And Abessalom spoke not to Amnon, good or bad, because Abessalom hated Amnon, on account of his humbling his sister Themar.
And it came to pass at the end of two whole years, that they were shearing sheep for Abessalom in Belasor near Ephraim: and Abessalom invited all the king's sons.
And Abessalom came to the king, and said, Behold, thy servant has a sheep-shearing; let now the king and his servants go with thy servant.
And the king said to Abessalom, Nay, my son, let us not all go, and let us not be burdensome to thee. And he pressed him; but he would not go, but blessed him.
And Abessalom said to him, And if not, let I pray thee, my brother Amnon go with us. And the king said to him, Why should he go with thee?
And Abessalom pressed him, and he sent with him Amnon and all the king's sons; and Abessalom made a banquet like the banquet of the king.
And Abessalom charged his servants, saying, Mark when the heart of Amnon shall be merry with wine, and I shall say to you, Smite Amnon, and slay him: fear not; for is it not I that command you? Be courageous, and be valiant.
And the servants of Abessalom did to Amnon as Abessalom commanded them: and all the sons of the king rose up, and they mounted every man his mule, and fled.
And it came to pass, when they were in the way, that a report came to David, saying, Abessalom has slain all the king's sons, and there is not one of them left.
Then the king arose, and rent his garments, and lay upon the ground: and all his servants that were standing round him rent their garments.
And Jonadab the son of Samaa brother of David, answered and said, Let not my Lord the king say that he has slain all the young men the sons of the king, for Amnon only of them all is dead; for he was appointed to death by the mouth of Abessalom from the day that he humbled his sister Themar.
And now let not my lord the king take the matter to heart, saying, All the king's sons are dead: for Amnon only of them is dead.
And Abessalom escaped: and the young man the watchman, lifted up his eyes, and looked; and, behold, much people went in the way behind him from the side of the mountain in the descent: and the watchman came and told the king, and said, I have seen men by the way of Oronen, by the side of the mountain.
And Jonadab said to the king, Behold, the king's sons are present: according to the word of thy servant, so has it happened.
And it came to pass when he had finished speaking, that, behold, the king's sons came, and lifted up their voices and wept: and the king also and all his servants wept with a very great weeping.
But Abessalom fled, and went to Tholmi son of Emiud the king of Gedsur to the land of Chamaachad: and king David mourned for his son continually.
So Abessalom fled, and departed to Gedsur, and was there three years.
And king David ceased to go out after Abessalom, for he was comforted concerning Amnon, touching his death.
But I determined this for myself, that I would not come to you again in sorrow.
For if I make you sorry, then who will make me glad but he who is made sorry by me?
And I wrote this very thing to you, so that, when I came, I wouldn't have sorrow from them of whom I ought to rejoice; having confidence in you all, that my joy would be shared by all of you.
For out of much affliction and anguish of heart I wrote to you with many tears, not that you should be made sorry, but that you might know the love that I have so abundantly for you.
But if any has caused sorrow, he has caused sorrow, not to me, but in part (that I not press too heavily) to you all.
Sufficient to such a one is this punishment which was inflicted by the many;
so that on the contrary you should rather forgive him and comfort him, lest by any means such a one should be swallowed up with his excessive sorrow.
Therefore I beg you to confirm your love toward him.
For to this end I also wrote, that I might know the proof of you, whether you are obedient in all things.
Now I also forgive whomever you forgive anything. For if indeed I have forgiven anything, I have forgiven that one for your sakes in the presence of Christ,
that no advantage may be gained over us by Satan; for we are not ignorant of his schemes.
Now when I came to Troas for the Good News of Christ, and when a door was opened to me in the Lord,
I had no relief for my spirit, because I didn't find Titus, my brother, but taking my leave of them, I went out into Macedonia.
Now thanks be to God, who always leads us in triumph in Christ, and reveals through us the sweet aroma of his knowledge in every place.
For we are a sweet aroma of Christ to God, in those who are saved, and in those who perish;
to the one a stench from death to death; to the other a sweet aroma from life to life. Who is sufficient for these things?
For we are not as so many, peddling the word of God. But as of sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of God, we speak in Christ.
Now faith is assurance of things hoped for, proof of things not seen.
For by this, the elders obtained testimony.
By faith, we understand that the universe has been framed by the word of God, so that what is seen has not been made out of things which are visible.
By faith, Abel offered to God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain, through which he had testimony given to him that he was righteous, God testifying with respect to his gifts; and through it he, being dead, still speaks.
By faith, Enoch was taken away, so that he wouldn't see death, and he was not found, because God translated him. For he has had testimony given to him that before his translation he had been well pleasing to God.
Without faith it is impossible to be well pleasing to him, for he who comes to God must believe that he exists, and that he is a rewarder of those who seek him.
By faith, Noah, being warned about things not yet seen, moved with godly fear, prepared a ship for the saving of his house, through which he condemned the world, and became heir of the righteousness which is according to faith.
By faith, Abraham, when he was called, obeyed to go out to the place which he was to receive for an inheritance. He went out, not knowing where he went.
By faith, he lived as an alien in the land of promise, as in a land not his own, dwelling in tents, with Isaac and Jacob, the heirs with him of the same promise.
For he looked for the city which has the foundations, whose builder and maker is God.
By faith, even Sarah herself received power to conceive, and she bore a child when she was past age, since she counted him faithful who had promised.
Therefore as many as the stars of the sky in multitude, and as innumerable as the sand which is by the sea shore, were fathered by one man, and him as good as dead.
These all died in faith, not having received the promises, but having seen them and embraced them from afar, and having confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth.
For those who say such things make it clear that they are seeking a country of their own.
If indeed they had been thinking of that country from which they went out, they would have had enough time to return.
But now they desire a better country, that is, a heavenly one. Therefore God is not ashamed of them, to be called their God, for he has prepared a city for them.
By faith, Abraham, being tested, offered up Isaac. Yes, he who had gladly received the promises was offering up his one and only son;
even he to whom it was said, 'In Isaac will your seed be called;'
concluding that God is able to raise up even from the dead. Figuratively speaking, he also did receive him back from the dead.
By faith, Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau, even concerning things to come.
By faith, Jacob, when he was dying, blessed each of the sons of Joseph, and worshiped, leaning on the top of his staff.
By faith, Joseph, when his end was near, made mention of the departure of the children of Israel; and gave instructions concerning his bones.
By faith, Moses, when he was born, was hidden for three months by his parents, because they saw that he was a beautiful child, and they were not afraid of the king's commandment.
By faith, Moses, when he had grown up, refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter,
choosing rather to share ill treatment with God's people, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a time;
accounting the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt; for he looked to the reward.
By faith, he left Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the king; for he endured, as seeing him who is invisible.
By faith, he kept the Passover, and the sprinkling of the blood, that the destroyer of the firstborn should not touch them.
By faith, they passed through the Red Sea as on dry land. When the Egyptians tried to do so, they were swallowed up.
By faith, the walls of Jericho fell down, after they had been encircled for seven days.
By faith, Rahab the prostitute, didn't perish with those who were disobedient, having received the spies in peace.
What more shall I say? For the time would fail me if I told of Gideon, Barak, Samson, Jephthah, David, Samuel, and the prophets;
who, through faith subdued kingdoms, worked out righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions,
quenched the power of fire, from weakness were made strong, grew mighty in war, and caused foreign armies to flee.
Women received their dead by resurrection. Others were tortured, not accepting their deliverance, that they might obtain a better resurrection.
Others were tried by mocking and scourging, yes, moreover by bonds and imprisonment.
They were stoned. They went around in sheep skins and in goat skins; being destitute, afflicted, ill-treated
(of whom the world was not worthy), wandering in deserts, mountains, caves, and the holes of the earth.
These all, having had testimony given to them through their faith, didn't receive the promise,
God having provided some better thing concerning us, so that apart from us they should not be made perfect.
In like manner, wives, be in subjection to your own husbands; so that, even if any don't obey the Word, they may be won by the behavior of their wives without a word;
seeing your pure behavior in fear.
Let your beauty be not just the outward adorning of braiding the hair, and of wearing jewels of gold, or of putting on fine clothing;
but in the hidden person of the heart, in the incorruptible adornment of a gentle and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God very precious.
For this is how the holy women before, who hoped in God also adorned themselves, being in subjection to their own husbands:
as Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him lord, whose children you now are, if you do well, and are not put in fear by any terror.
You husbands, in like manner, live with your wives according to knowledge, giving honor to the woman, as to the weaker vessel, as being also joint heirs of the grace of life; that your prayers may not be hindered.
Finally, be all like-minded, compassionate, loving as brothers, tenderhearted, courteous,
not rendering evil for evil, or reviling for reviling; but instead blessing; knowing that to this were you called, that you may inherit a blessing.
For, 'He who would love life, and see good days, let him keep his tongue from evil, and his lips from speaking deceit.
Let him turn away from evil, and do good. Let him seek peace, and pursue it.
For the eyes of the Lord are on the righteous, and his ears open to their prayer; but the face of the Lord is against those who do evil.'
Now who is he who will harm you, if you become imitators of that which is good?
But even if you should suffer for righteousness' sake, you are blessed. 'Don't fear what they fear, neither be troubled.'
But sanctify the Lord God in your hearts; and always be ready to give an answer to everyone who asks you a reason concerning the hope that is in you, with humility and fear:
having a good conscience; that, while you are spoken against as evildoers, they may be disappointed who curse your good manner of life in Christ.
For it is better, if it is God's will, that you suffer for doing well than for doing evil.
Because Christ also suffered for sins once, the righteous for the unrighteous, that he might bring you to God; being put to death in the flesh, but made alive in the spirit;
in which he also went and preached to the spirits in prison,
who before were disobedient, when God waited patiently in the days of Noah, while the ship was being built. In it, few, that is, eight souls, were saved through water.
This is a symbol of baptism, which now saves you--not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience toward God, through the resurrection of Jesus Christ,
who is at the right hand of God, having gone into heaven, angels and authorities and powers being made subject to him.
Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus according to the commandment of God our Savior, and Christ Jesus our hope;
to Timothy, my true child in faith: Grace, mercy, and peace, from God our Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.
As I urged you when I was going into Macedonia, stay at Ephesus that you might command certain men not to teach a different doctrine,
neither to pay attention to myths and endless genealogies, which cause disputes, rather than God's stewardship, which is in faith--
but the goal of this command is love, out of a pure heart and a good conscience and unfeigned faith;
from which things some, having missed the mark, have turned aside to vain talking;
desiring to be teachers of the law, though they understand neither what they say, nor about what they strongly affirm.
But we know that the law is good, if a man uses it lawfully,
as knowing this, that law is not made for a righteous man, but for the lawless and insubordinate, for the ungodly and sinners, for the unholy and profane, for murderers of fathers and murderers of mothers, for manslayers,
for the sexually immoral, for homosexuals, for slave-traders, for liars, for perjurers, and for any other thing contrary to the sound doctrine;
according to the Good News of the glory of the blessed God, which was committed to my trust.
And I thank him who enabled me, Christ Jesus our Lord, because he counted me faithful, appointing me to service;
although I was before a blasphemer, a persecutor, and insolent. However, I obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly in unbelief.
The grace of our Lord abounded exceedingly with faith and love which is in Christ Jesus.
The saying is faithful and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners; of whom I am chief.
However, for this cause I obtained mercy, that in me first, Jesus Christ might display all his patience, for an example of those who were going to believe in him for eternal life.
Now to the King eternal, immortal, invisible, to God who alone is wise, be honor and glory forever and ever. Amen.
This instruction I commit to you, my child Timothy, according to the prophecies which led the way to you, that by them you may wage the good warfare;
holding faith and a good conscience; which some having thrust away made a shipwreck concerning the faith;
of whom is Hymenaeus and Alexander; whom I delivered to Satan, that they might be taught not to blaspheme.
When we had escaped, then they learned that the island was called Malta.
The natives showed us uncommon kindness; for they kindled a fire, and received us all, because of the present rain, and because of the cold.
But when Paul had gathered a bundle of sticks and laid them on the fire, a viper came out because of the heat, and fastened on his hand.
When the natives saw the creature hanging from his hand, they said one to another, 'No doubt this man is a murderer, whom, though he has escaped from the sea, yet Justice has not allowed to live.'
However he shook off the creature into the fire, and wasn't harmed.
But they expected that he would have swollen or fallen down dead suddenly, but when they watched for a long time and saw nothing bad happen to him, they changed their minds, and said that he was a god.
Now in the neighborhood of that place were lands belonging to the chief man of the island, named Publius, who received us, and courteously entertained us for three days.
It happened that the father of Publius lay sick of fever and dysentery. Paul entered in to him, prayed, and laying his hands on him, healed him.
Then when this was done, the rest also who had diseases in the island came, and were cured.
They also honored us with many honors, and when we sailed, they put on board the things that we needed.
After three months, we set sail in a ship of Alexandria which had wintered in the island, whose sign was 'The Twin Brothers.'
Touching at Syracuse, we stayed there three days.
From there we circled around and arrived at Rhegium. After one day, a south wind sprang up, and on the second day we came to Puteoli,
where we found brothers, and were entreated to stay with them for seven days. So we came to Rome.
From there the brothers, when they heard of us, came to meet us as far as The Market of Appius and The Three Taverns. When Paul saw them, he thanked God, and took courage.
When we entered into Rome, the centurion delivered the prisoners to the captain of the guard, but Paul was allowed to stay by himself with the soldier who guarded him.
It happened that after three days Paul called together those who were the leaders of the Jews. When they had come together, he said to them, 'I, brothers, though I had done nothing against the people, or the customs of our fathers, still was delivered prisoner from Jerusalem into the hands of the Romans,
who, when they had examined me, desired to set me free, because there was no cause of death in me.
But when the Jews spoke against it, I was constrained to appeal to Caesar, not that I had anything about which to accuse my nation.
For this cause therefore I asked to see you and to speak with you. For because of the hope of Israel I am bound with this chain.'
They said to him, 'We neither received letters from Judea concerning you, nor did any of the brothers come here and report or speak any evil of you.
But we desire to hear from you what you think. For, as concerning this sect, it is known to us that everywhere it is spoken against.'
When they had appointed him a day, many people came to him at his lodging. He explained to them, testifying about the Kingdom of God, and persuading them concerning Jesus, both from the law of Moses and from the prophets, from morning until evening.
Some believed the things which were spoken, and some disbelieved.
When they didn't agree among themselves, they departed after Paul had spoken one word, 'The Holy Spirit spoke rightly through Isaiah, the prophet, to our fathers,
saying, 'Go to this people, and say, in hearing, you will hear, but will in no way understand. In seeing, you will see, but will in no way perceive.
For this people's heart has grown callous. Their ears are dull of hearing. Their eyes they have closed. Lest they should see with their eyes, hear with their ears, understand with their heart, and would turn again, and I would heal them.'
'Be it known therefore to you, that the salvation of God is sent to the nations. They will also listen.'
When he had said these words, the Jews departed, having a great dispute among themselves.
Paul stayed two whole years in his own rented house, and received all who were coming to him,
preaching the Kingdom of God, and teaching the things concerning the Lord Jesus Christ with all boldness, without hindrance.
I tell the truth in Christ. I am not lying, my conscience testifying with me in the Holy Spirit,
that I have great sorrow and unceasing pain in my heart.
For I could wish that I myself were accursed from Christ for my brothers' sake, my relatives according to the flesh,
who are Israelites; whose is the adoption, the glory, the covenants, the giving of the law, the service, and the promises;
of whom are the fathers, and from whom is Christ as concerning the flesh, who is over all, God, blessed forever. Amen.
But it is not as though the word of God has come to nothing. For they are not all Israel, that are of Israel.
Neither, because they are Abraham's seed, are they all children. But, 'In Isaac will your seed be called.'
That is, it is not the children of the flesh who are children of God, but the children of the promise are counted as a seed.
For this is a word of promise, 'At the appointed time I will come, and Sarah will have a son.'
Not only so, but Rebecca also conceived by one, by our father Isaac.
For being not yet born, neither having done anything good or bad, that the purpose of God according to election might stand, not of works, but of him who calls,
it was said to her, 'The elder will serve the younger.'
Even as it is written, 'Jacob I loved, but Esau I hated.'
What shall we say then? Is there unrighteousness with God? May it never be!
For he said to Moses, 'I will have mercy on whom I have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I have compassion.'
So then it is not of him who wills, nor of him who runs, but of God who has mercy.
For the Scripture says to Pharaoh, 'For this very purpose I caused you to be raised up, that I might show in you my power, and that my name might be proclaimed in all the earth.'
So then, he has mercy on whom he desires, and he hardens whom he desires.
You will say then to me, 'Why does he still find fault? For who withstands his will?'
But indeed, O man, who are you to reply against God? Will the thing formed ask him who formed it, 'Why did you make me like this?'
Or hasn't the potter a right over the clay, from the same lump to make one part a vessel for honor, and another for dishonor?
What if God, willing to show his wrath, and to make his power known, endured with much patience vessels of wrath made for destruction,
and that he might make known the riches of his glory on vessels of mercy, which he prepared beforehand for glory,
us, whom he also called, not from the Jews only, but also from the Gentiles?
As he says also in Hosea, 'I will call them 'my people,' which were not my people; and her 'beloved,' who was not beloved.'
'It will be that in the place where it was said to them, 'You are not my people,' There they will be called 'children of the living God.''
Isaiah cries concerning Israel, 'If the number of the children of Israel are as the sand of the sea, it is the remnant who will be saved;
for He will finish the work and cut it short in righteousness, because the LORD will make a short work upon the earth.'
As Isaiah has said before, 'Unless the Lord of Armies
What shall we say then? That the Gentiles, who didn't follow after righteousness, attained to righteousness, even the righteousness which is of faith;
but Israel, following after a law of righteousness, didn't arrive at the law of righteousness.
Why? Because they didn't seek it by faith, but as it were by works of the law. They stumbled over the stumbling stone;
even as it is written, 'Behold, I lay in Zion a stumbling stone and a rock of offense; and no one who believes in him will be disappointed.'
Now there was a man of the Pharisees named Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews.
The same came to him by night, and said to him, 'Rabbi, we know that you are a teacher come from God, for no one can do these signs that you do, unless God is with him.'
Jesus answered him, 'Most certainly, I tell you, unless one is born anew, he can't see the Kingdom of God.'
Nicodemus said to him, 'How can a man be born when he is old? Can he enter a second time into his mother's womb, and be born?'
Jesus answered, 'Most certainly I tell you, unless one is born of water and spirit, he can't enter into the Kingdom of God!
That which is born of the flesh is flesh. That which is born of the Spirit is spirit.
Don't marvel that I said to you, 'You must be born anew.'
The wind blows where it wants to, and you hear its sound, but don't know where it comes from and where it is going. So is everyone who is born of the Spirit.'
Nicodemus answered him, 'How can these things be?'
Jesus answered him, 'Are you the teacher of Israel, and don't understand these things?
Most certainly I tell you, we speak that which we know, and testify of that which we have seen, and you don't receive our witness.
If I told you earthly things and you don't believe, how will you believe if I tell you heavenly things?
No one has ascended into heaven, but he who descended out of heaven, the Son of Man, who is in heaven.
As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of Man be lifted up,
that whoever believes in him should not perish, but have eternal life.
For God so loved the world, that he gave his one and only Son, that whoever believes in him should not perish, but have eternal life.
For God didn't send his Son into the world to judge the world, but that the world should be saved through him.
He who believes in him is not judged. He who doesn't believe has been judged already, because he has not believed in the name of the one and only Son of God.
This is the judgment, that the light has come into the world, and men loved the darkness rather than the light; for their works were evil.
For everyone who does evil hates the light, and doesn't come to the light, lest his works would be exposed.
But he who does the truth comes to the light, that his works may be revealed, that they have been done in God.'
After these things, Jesus came with his disciples into the land of Judea. He stayed there with them, and baptized.
John also was baptizing in Enon near Salim, because there was much water there. They came, and were baptized.
For John was not yet thrown into prison.
There arose therefore a questioning on the part of John's disciples with some Jews about purification.
They came to John, and said to him, 'Rabbi, he who was with you beyond the Jordan, to whom you have testified, behold, the same baptizes, and everyone is coming to him.'
John answered, 'A man can receive nothing, unless it has been given him from heaven.
You yourselves testify that I said, 'I am not the Christ,' but, 'I have been sent before him.'
He who has the bride is the bridegroom; but the friend of the bridegroom, who stands and hears him, rejoices greatly because of the bridegroom's voice. This, my joy, therefore is made full.
He must increase, but I must decrease.
He who comes from above is above all. He who is from the Earth belongs to the Earth, and speaks of the Earth. He who comes from heaven is above all.
What he has seen and heard, of that he testifies; and no one receives his witness.
He who has received his witness has set his seal to this, that God is true.
For he whom God has sent speaks the words of God; for God gives the Spirit without measure.
The Father loves the Son, and has given all things into his hand.
One who believes in the Son has eternal life, but one who disobeys the Son won't see life, but the wrath of God remains on him.'
Now it happened on the second Sabbath after the first, that he was going through the grain fields. His disciples plucked the heads of grain, and ate, rubbing them in their hands.
But some of the Pharisees said to them, 'Why do you do that which is not lawful to do on the Sabbath day?'
Jesus, answering them, said, 'Haven't you read what David did when he was hungry, he, and those who were with him;
how he entered into the house of God, and took and ate the show bread, and gave also to those who were with him, which is not lawful to eat except for the priests alone?'
He said to them, 'The Son of Man is lord of the Sabbath.'
It also happened on another Sabbath that he entered into the synagogue and taught. There was a man there, and his right hand was withered.
The scribes and the Pharisees watched him, to see whether he would heal on the Sabbath, that they might find an accusation against him.
But he knew their thoughts; and he said to the man who had the withered hand, 'Rise up, and stand in the middle.' He arose and stood.
Then Jesus said to them, 'I will ask you something: Is it lawful on the Sabbath to do good, or to do harm? To save a life, or to kill?'
He looked around at them all, and said to the man, 'Stretch out your hand.' He did, and his hand was restored as sound as the other.
But they were filled with rage, and talked with one another about what they might do to Jesus.
It happened in these days, that he went out to the mountain to pray, and he continued all night in prayer to God.
When it was day, he called his disciples, and from them he chose twelve, whom he also named apostles:
Simon, whom he also named Peter; Andrew, his brother; James; John; Philip; Bartholomew;
Matthew; Thomas; James, the son of Alphaeus; Simon, who was called the Zealot;
Judas the son of James; and Judas Iscariot, who also became a traitor.
He came down with them, and stood on a level place, with a crowd of his disciples, and a great number of the people from all Judea and Jerusalem, and the sea coast of Tyre and Sidon, who came to hear him and to be healed of their diseases;
as well as those who were troubled by unclean spirits, and they were being healed.
All the multitude sought to touch him, for power came out from him and healed them all.
He lifted up his eyes to his disciples, and said, 'Blessed are you who are poor, for yours is the Kingdom of God.
Blessed are you who hunger now, for you will be filled. Blessed are you who weep now, for you will laugh.
Blessed are you when men shall hate you, and when they shall exclude and mock you, and throw out your name as evil, for the Son of Man's sake.
Rejoice in that day, and leap for joy, for behold, your reward is great in heaven, for their fathers did the same thing to the prophets.
'But woe to you who are rich! For you have received your consolation.
Woe to you, you who are full now, for you will be hungry. Woe to you who laugh now, for you will mourn and weep.
Woe, men speak well of you, for their fathers did the same thing to the false prophets.
'But I tell you who hear: love your enemies, do good to those who hate you,
bless those who curse you, and pray for those who mistreat you.
To him who strikes you on the cheek, offer also the other; and from him who takes away your cloak, don't withhold your coat also.
Give to everyone who asks you, and don't ask him who takes away your goods to give them back again.
'As you would like people to do to you, do exactly so to them.
If you love those who love you, what credit is that to you? For even sinners love those who love them.
If you do good to those who do good to you, what credit is that to you? For even sinners do the same.
If you lend to those from whom you hope to receive, what credit is that to you? Even sinners lend to sinners, to receive back as much.
But love your enemies, and do good, and lend, expecting nothing back; and your reward will be great, and you will be children of the Most High; for he is kind toward the unthankful and evil.
Therefore be merciful, even as your Father is also merciful.
Don't judge, and you won't be judged. Don't condemn, and you won't be condemned. Set free, and you will be set free.
'Give, and it will be given to you: good measure, pressed down, shaken together, and running over, will be given to you. For with the same measure you measure it will be measured back to you.'
He spoke a parable to them. 'Can the blind guide the blind? Won't they both fall into a pit?
A disciple is not above his teacher, but everyone when he is fully trained will be like his teacher.
Why do you see the speck of chaff that is in your brother's eye, but don't consider the beam that is in your own eye?
Or how can you tell your brother, 'Brother, let me remove the speck of chaff that is in your eye,' when you yourself don't see the beam that is in your own eye? You hypocrite! First remove the beam from your own eye, and then you can see clearly to remove the speck of chaff that is in your brother's eye.
For there is no good tree that brings forth rotten fruit; nor again a rotten tree that brings forth good fruit.
For each tree is known by its own fruit. For people don't gather figs from thorns, nor do they gather grapes from a bramble bush.
The good man out of the good treasure of his heart brings out that which is good, and the evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart brings out that which is evil, for out of the abundance of the heart, his mouth speaks.
'Why do you call me, 'Lord, Lord,' and don't do the things which I say?
Everyone who comes to me, and hears my words, and does them, I will show you who he is like.
He is like a man building a house, who dug and went deep, and laid a foundation on the rock. When a flood arose, the stream broke against that house, and could not shake it, because it was founded on the rock.
But he who hears, and doesn't do, is like a man who built a house on the earth without a foundation, against which the stream broke, and immediately it fell, and the ruin of that house was great.'
Now after these things, the Lord also appointed seventy others, and sent them two by two ahead of him into every city and place, where he was about to come.
Then he said to them, 'The harvest is indeed plentiful, but the laborers are few. Pray therefore to the Lord of the harvest, that he may send out laborers into his harvest.
Go your ways. Behold, I send you out as lambs among wolves.
Carry no purse, nor wallet, nor sandals. Greet no one on the way.
Into whatever house you enter, first say, 'Peace be to this house.'
If a son of peace is there, your peace will rest on him; but if not, it will return to you.
Remain in that same house, eating and drinking the things they give, for the laborer is worthy of his wages. Don't go from house to house.
Into whatever city you enter, and they receive you, eat the things that are set before you.
Heal the sick who are therein, and tell them, 'The Kingdom of God has come near to you.'
But into whatever city you enter, and they don't receive you, go out into its streets and say,
'Even the dust from your city that clings to us, we wipe off against you. Nevertheless know this, that the Kingdom of God has come near to you.'
I tell you, it will be more tolerable in that day for Sodom than for that city.
'Woe to you, Chorazin! Woe to you, Bethsaida! For if the mighty works had been done in Tyre and Sidon which were done in you, they would have repented long ago, sitting in sackcloth and ashes.
But it will be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon in the judgment than for you.
You, Capernaum, who are exalted to heaven, will be brought down to Hades.
Whoever listens to you listens to me, and whoever rejects you rejects me. Whoever rejects me rejects him who sent me.'
The seventy returned with joy, saying, 'Lord, even the demons are subject to us in your name!'
He said to them, 'I saw Satan having fallen like lightning from heaven.
Behold, I give you authority to tread on serpents and scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy. Nothing will in any way hurt you.
Nevertheless, don't rejoice in this, that the spirits are subject to you, but rejoice that your names are written in heaven.'
In that same hour Jesus rejoiced in the Holy Spirit, and said, 'I thank you, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that you have hidden these things from the wise and understanding, and revealed them to little children. Yes, Father, for so it was well-pleasing in your sight.'
Turning to the disciples, he said, 'All things have been delivered to me by my Father. No one knows who the Son is, except the Father, and who the Father is, except the Son, and he to whomever the Son desires to reveal him.'
Turning to the disciples, he said privately, 'Blessed are the eyes which see the things that you see,
for I tell you that many prophets and kings desired to see the things which you see, and didn't see them, and to hear the things which you hear, and didn't hear them.'
Behold, a certain lawyer stood up and tested him, saying, 'Teacher, what shall I do to inherit eternal life?'
He said to him, 'What is written in the law? How do you read it?'
He answered, 'You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, with all your soul, with all your strength, and with all your mind;
He said to him, 'You have answered correctly. Do this, and you will live.'
But he, desiring to justify himself, asked Jesus, 'Who is my neighbor?'
Jesus answered, 'A certain man was going down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and he fell among robbers, who both stripped him and beat him, and departed, leaving him half dead.
By chance a certain priest was going down that way. When he saw him, he passed by on the other side.
In the same way a Levite also, when he came to the place, and saw him, passed by on the other side.
But a certain Samaritan, as he traveled, came where he was. When he saw him, he was moved with compassion,
came to him, and bound up his wounds, pouring on oil and wine. He set him on his own animal, and brought him to an inn, and took care of him.
On the next day, when he departed, he took out two denarii, and gave them to the host, and said to him, 'Take care of him. Whatever you spend beyond that, I will repay you when I return.'
Now which of these three do you think seemed to be a neighbor to him who fell among the robbers?'
He said, 'He who showed mercy on him.' Then Jesus said to him, 'Go and do likewise.'
It happened as they went on their way, he entered into a certain village, and a certain woman named Martha received him into her house.
She had a sister called Mary, who also sat at Jesus' feet, and heard his word.
But Martha was distracted with much serving, and she came up to him, and said, 'Lord, don't you care that my sister left me to serve alone? Ask her therefore to help me.'
Jesus answered her, 'Martha, Martha, you are anxious and troubled about many things,
but one thing is needed. Mary has chosen the good part, which will not be taken away from her.'
'I am the true vine, and my Father is the farmer.
Every branch in me that doesn't bear fruit, he takes away. Every branch that bears fruit, he prunes, that it may bear more fruit.
You are already pruned clean because of the word which I have spoken to you.
Remain in me, and I in you. As the branch can't bear fruit by itself, unless it remains in the vine, so neither can you, unless you remain in me.
I am the vine. You are the branches. He who remains in me, and I in him, the same bears much fruit, for apart from me you can do nothing.
If a man doesn't remain in me, he is thrown out as a branch, and is withered; and they gather them, throw them into the fire, and they are burned.
If you remain in me, and my words remain in you, you will ask whatever you desire, and it will be done for you.
'In this is my Father glorified, that you bear much fruit; and so you will be my disciples.
Even as the Father has loved me, I also have loved you. Remain in my love.
If you keep my commandments, you will remain in my love; even as I have kept my Father's commandments, and remain in his love.
I have spoken these things to you, that my joy may remain in you, and that your joy may be made full.
'This is my commandment, that you love one another, even as I have loved you.
Greater love has no one than this, that someone lay down his life for his friends.
You are my friends, if you do whatever I command you.
No longer do I call you servants, for the servant doesn't know what his lord does. But I have called you friends, for everything that I heard from my Father, I have made known to you.
You didn't choose me, but I chose you, and appointed you, that you should go and bear fruit, and that your fruit should remain; that whatever you will ask of the Father in my name, he may give it to you.
'I command these things to you, that you may love one another.
If the world hates you, you know that it has hated me before it hated you.
If you were of the world, the world would love its own. But because you are not of the world, since I chose you out of the world, therefore the world hates you.
Remember the word that I said to you: 'A servant is not greater than his lord.' If they persecuted me, they will also persecute you. If they kept my word, they will keep yours also.
But all these things will they do to you for my name's sake, because they don't know him who sent me.
If I had not come and spoken to them, they would not have had sin; but now they have no excuse for their sin.
He who hates me, hates my Father also.
If I hadn't done among them the works which no one else did, they wouldn't have had sin. But now have they seen and also hated both me and my Father.
But this happened so that the word may be fulfilled which was written in their law, 'They hated me without a cause.'
'When the Counselor has come, whom I will send to you from the Father, the Spirit of truth, who proceeds from the Father, he will testify about me.
You will also testify, because you have been with me from the beginning.
Paul, Silvanus, and Timothy, to the assembly of the Thessalonians in God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ:
Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
We are bound to always give thanks to God for you, brothers, even as it is appropriate, because your faith grows exceedingly, and the love of each and every one of you towards one another abounds;
so that we ourselves boast about you in the assemblies of God for your patience and faith in all your persecutions and in the afflictions which you endure.
This is an obvious sign of the righteous judgment of God, to the end that you may be counted worthy of the Kingdom of God, for which you also suffer.
Since it is a righteous thing with God to repay affliction to those who afflict you,
and to give relief to you who are afflicted with us, when the Lord Jesus is revealed from heaven with his mighty angels in flaming fire,
giving vengeance to those who don't know God, and to those who don't obey the Good News of our Lord Jesus,
who will pay the penalty: eternal destruction from the face of the Lord and from the glory of his might,
when he comes to be glorified in his saints, and to be admired among all those who have believed (because our testimony to you was believed) in that day.
To this end we also pray always for you, that our God may count you worthy of your calling, and fulfill every desire of goodness and work of faith, with power;
that the name of our Lord Jesus may be glorified in you, and you in him, according to the grace of our God and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Paul, Silvanus, and Timothy, to the assembly of the Thessalonians in God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ: Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
We always give thanks to God for all of you, mentioning you in our prayers,
remembering without ceasing your work of faith and labor of love and patience of hope in our Lord Jesus Christ, before our God and Father.
We know, brothers loved by God, that you are chosen,
and that our Good News came to you not in word only, but also in power, and in the Holy Spirit, and with much assurance. You know what kind of men we showed ourselves to be among you for your sake.
You became imitators of us, and of the Lord, having received the word in much affliction, with joy of the Holy Spirit,
so that you became an example to all who believe in Macedonia and in Achaia.
For from you the word of the Lord has been declared, not only in Macedonia and Achaia, but also in every place your faith toward God has gone out; so that we need not to say anything.
For they themselves report concerning us what kind of a reception we had from you; and how you turned to God from idols, to serve a living and true God,
and to wait for his Son from heaven, whom he raised from the dead--Jesus, who delivers us from the wrath to come.
For this Melchizedek, king of Salem, priest of God Most High, who met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the kings and blessed him,
to whom also Abraham divided a tenth part of all (being first, by interpretation, king of righteousness, and then also king of Salem, which is king of peace;
without father, without mother, without genealogy, having neither beginning of days nor end of life, but made like the Son of God), remains a priest continually.
Now consider how great this man was, to whom even Abraham, the patriarch, gave a tenth out of the best spoils.
They indeed of the sons of Levi who receive the priest's office have a commandment to take tithes of the people according to the law, that is, of their brothers, though these have come out of the body of Abraham,
but he whose genealogy is not counted from them has accepted tithes from Abraham, and has blessed him who has the promises.
But without any dispute the lesser is blessed by the greater.
Here people who die receive tithes, but there one receives tithes of whom it is testified that he lives.
We can say that through Abraham even Levi, who receives tithes, has paid tithes,
for he was yet in the body of his father when Melchizedek met him.
Now if there was perfection through the Levitical priesthood (for under it the people have received the law), what further need was there for another priest to arise after the order of Melchizedek, and not be called after the order of Aaron?
For the priesthood being changed, there is of necessity a change made also in the law.
For he of whom these things are said belongs to another tribe, from which no one has officiated at the altar.
For it is evident that our Lord has sprung out of Judah, about which tribe Moses spoke nothing concerning priesthood.
This is yet more abundantly evident, if after the likeness of Melchizedek there arises another priest,
who has been made, not after the law of a fleshly commandment, but after the power of an endless life:
for it is testified, 'You are a priest forever, according to the order of Melchizedek.'
For there is an annulling of a foregoing commandment because of its weakness and uselessness
(for the law made nothing perfect), and a bringing in of a better hope, through which we draw near to God.
Inasmuch as he was not made priest without the taking of an oath
(for they indeed have been made priests without an oath), but he with an oath by him that says of him, 'The Lord swore and will not change his mind, 'You are a priest forever, according to the order of Melchizedek.''
By so much, Jesus has become the collateral of a better covenant.
Many, indeed, have been made priests, because they are hindered from continuing by death.
But he, because he lives forever, has his priesthood unchangeable.
Therefore he is also able to save to the uttermost those who draw near to God through him, seeing that he lives forever to make intercession for them.
For such a high priest was fitting for us: holy, guiltless, undefiled, separated from sinners, and made higher than the heavens;
who doesn't need, like those high priests, to offer up sacrifices daily, first for his own sins, and then for the sins of the people. For he did this once for all, when he offered up himself.
For the law appoints men as high priests who have weakness, but the word of the oath which came after the law appoints a Son forever who has been perfected.
Now about that time, Herod the king stretched out his hands to oppress some of the assembly.
He killed James, the brother of John, with the sword.
When he saw that it pleased the Jews, he proceeded to seize Peter also. This was during the days of unleavened bread.
When he had arrested him, he put him in prison, and delivered him to four squads of four soldiers each to guard him, intending to bring him out to the people after the Passover.
Peter therefore was kept in the prison, but constant prayer was made by the assembly to God for him.
The same night when Herod was about to bring him out, Peter was sleeping between two soldiers, bound with two chains. Guards in front of the door kept the prison.
And behold, an angel of the Lord stood by him, and a light shone in the cell. He struck Peter on the side, and woke him up, saying, 'Stand up quickly!' His chains fell off from his hands.
The angel said to him, 'Get dressed and put on your sandals.' He did so. He said to him, 'Put on your cloak, and follow me.'
And he went out and followed him. He didn't know that what was being done by the angel was real, but thought he saw a vision.
When they were past the first and the second guard, they came to the iron gate that leads into the city, which opened to them by itself. They went out, and went down one street, and immediately the angel departed from him.
When Peter had come to himself, he said, 'Now I truly know that the Lord has sent out his angel and delivered me out of the hand of Herod, and from everything the Jewish people were expecting.'
Thinking about that, he came to the house of Mary, the mother of John whose surname was Mark, where many were gathered together and were praying.
When Peter knocked at the door of the gate, a maid named Rhoda came to answer.
When she recognized Peter's voice, she didn't open the gate for joy, but ran in, and reported that Peter was standing in front of the gate.
They said to her, 'You are crazy!' But she insisted that it was so. They said, 'It is his angel.'
But Peter continued knocking. When they had opened, they saw him, and were amazed.
But he, beckoning to them with his hand to be silent, declared to them how the Lord had brought him out of the prison. He said, 'Tell these things to James, and to the brothers.' Then he departed, and went to another place.
Now as soon as it was day, there was no small stir among the soldiers about what had become of Peter.
When Herod had sought for him, and didn't find him, he examined the guards, and commanded that they should be put to death. He went down from Judea to Caesarea, and stayed there.
Now Herod was very angry with the people of Tyre and Sidon. They came with one accord to him, and, having made Blastus, the king's personal aide, their friend, they asked for peace, because their country depended on the king's country for food.
On an appointed day, Herod dressed himself in royal clothing, sat on the throne, and gave a speech to them.
The people shouted, 'The voice of a god, and not of a man!'
Immediately an angel of the Lord struck him, because he didn't give God the glory, and he was eaten by worms and died.
But the word of God grew and multiplied.
Barnabas and Saul returned to Jerusalem, when they had fulfilled their service, also taking with them John whose surname was Mark.
If there is therefore any exhortation in Christ, if any consolation of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any tender mercies and compassion,
make my joy full, by being like-minded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind;
doing nothing through rivalry or through conceit, but in humility, each counting others better than himself;
each of you not just looking to his own things, but each of you also to the things of others.
Have this in your mind, which was also in Christ Jesus,
who, existing in the form of God, didn't consider equality with God a thing to be grasped,
but emptied himself, taking the form of a servant, being made in the likeness of men.
And being found in human form, he humbled himself, becoming obedient to death, yes, the death of the cross.
Therefore God also highly exalted him, and gave to him the name which is above every name;
that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of those in heaven, those on earth, and those under the earth,
and that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.
So then, my beloved, even as you have always obeyed, not only in my presence, but now much more in my absence, work out your own salvation with fear and trembling.
For it is God who works in you both to will and to work, for his good pleasure.
Do all things without murmurings and disputes,
that you may become blameless and harmless, children of God without blemish in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation, among whom you are seen as lights in the world,
holding up the word of life; that I may have something to boast in the day of Christ, that I didn't run in vain nor labor in vain.
Yes, and if I am poured out on the sacrifice and service of your faith, I rejoice, and rejoice with you all.
In the same way, you also rejoice, and rejoice with me.
But I hope in the Lord Jesus to send Timothy to you soon, that I also may be cheered up when I know how you are doing.
For I have no one else like-minded, who will truly care about you.
For they all seek their own, not the things of Jesus Christ.
But you know the proof of him, that, as a child serves a father, so he served with me in furtherance of the Good News.
Therefore I hope to send him at once, as soon as I see how it will go with me.
But I trust in the Lord that I myself also will come shortly.
But I counted it necessary to send to you Epaphroditus, my brother, fellow worker, fellow soldier, and your apostle and servant of my need;
since he longed for you all, and was very troubled, because you had heard that he was sick.
For indeed he was sick, nearly to death, but God had mercy on him; and not on him only, but on me also, that I might not have sorrow on sorrow.
I have sent him therefore the more diligently, that, when you see him again, you may rejoice, and that I may be the less sorrowful.
Receive him therefore in the Lord with all joy, and hold such in honor,
because for the work of Christ he came near to death, risking his life to supply that which was lacking in your service toward me.
Now when morning had come, all the chief priests and the elders of the people took counsel against Jesus to put him to death:
and they bound him, and led him away, and delivered him up to Pontius Pilate, the governor.
Then Judas, who betrayed him, when he saw that Jesus was condemned, felt remorse, and brought back the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests and elders,
saying, 'I have sinned in that I betrayed innocent blood.' But they said, 'What is that to us? You see to it.'
He threw down the pieces of silver in the sanctuary, and departed. He went away and hanged himself.
The chief priests took the pieces of silver, and said, 'It's not lawful to put them into the treasury, since it is the price of blood.'
They took counsel, and bought the potter's field with them, to bury strangers in.
Therefore that field was called 'The Field of Blood' to this day.
Then that which was spoken through Jeremiah the prophet was fulfilled, saying, 'They took the thirty pieces of silver, the price of him upon whom a price had been set, whom some of the children of Israel priced,
and they gave them for the potter's field, as the Lord commanded me.'
Now Jesus stood before the governor: and the governor asked him, saying, 'Are you the King of the Jews?' Jesus said to him, 'So you say.'
When he was accused by the chief priests and elders, he answered nothing.
Then Pilate said to him, 'Don't you hear how many things they testify against you?'
He gave him no answer, not even one word, so that the governor marveled greatly.
Now at the feast the governor was accustomed to release to the multitude one prisoner, whom they desired.
They had then a notable prisoner, called Barabbas.
When therefore they were gathered together, Pilate said to them, 'Whom do you want me to release to you? Barabbas, or Jesus, who is called Christ?'
For he knew that because of envy they had delivered him up.
While he was sitting on the judgment seat, his wife sent to him, saying, 'Have nothing to do with that righteous man, for I have suffered many things this day in a dream because of him.'
Now the chief priests and the elders persuaded the multitudes to ask for Barabbas, and destroy Jesus.
But the governor answered them, 'Which of the two do you want me to release to you?' They said, 'Barabbas!'
Pilate said to them, 'What then shall I do to Jesus, who is called Christ?' They all said to him, 'Let him be crucified!'
But the governor said, 'Why? What evil has he done?' But they cried out exceedingly, saying, 'Let him be crucified!'
So when Pilate saw that nothing was being gained, but rather that a disturbance was starting, he took water, and washed his hands before the multitude, saying, 'I am innocent of the blood of this righteous person. You see to it.'
All the people answered, 'May his blood be on us, and on our children!'
Then he released to them Barabbas, but Jesus he flogged and delivered to be crucified.
Then the governor's soldiers took Jesus into the Praetorium, and gathered the whole garrison together against him.
They stripped him, and put a scarlet robe on him.
They braided a crown of thorns and put it on his head, and a reed in his right hand; and they kneeled down before him, and mocked him, saying, 'Hail, King of the Jews!'
They spat on him, and took the reed and struck him on the head.
When they had mocked him, they took the robe off of him, and put his clothes on him, and led him away to crucify him.
As they came out, they found a man of Cyrene, Simon by name, and they compelled him to go with them, that he might carry his cross.
They came to a place called 'Golgotha,' that is to say, 'The place of a skull.'
They gave him sour wine to drink mixed with gall. When he had tasted it, he would not drink.
When they had crucified him, they divided his clothing among them, casting lots,
and they sat and watched him there.
They set up over his head the accusation against him written, 'THIS IS JESUS, THE KING OF THE JEWS.'
Then there were two robbers crucified with him, one on his right hand and one on the left.
Those who passed by blasphemed him, wagging their heads,
and saying, 'You who destroy the temple, and build it in three days, save yourself! If you are the Son of God, come down from the cross!'
Likewise the chief priests also mocking, with the scribes, the Pharisees, and the elders, said,
'He saved others, but he can't save himself. If he is the King of Israel, let him come down from the cross now, and we will believe in him.
He trusts in God. Let God deliver him now, if he wants him; for he said, 'I am the Son of God.''
The robbers also who were crucified with him cast on him the same reproach.
Now from the sixth hour
About the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, 'Eli, Eli, lima
Some of them who stood there, when they heard it, said, 'This man is calling Elijah.'
Immediately one of them ran, and took a sponge, and filled it with vinegar, and put it on a reed, and gave him a drink.
The rest said, 'Let him be. Let's see whether Elijah comes to save him.'
Jesus cried again with a loud voice, and yielded up his spirit.
Behold, the veil of the temple was torn in two from the top to the bottom. The earth quaked and the rocks were split.
The tombs were opened, and many bodies of the saints who had fallen asleep were raised;
and coming out of the tombs after his resurrection, they entered into the holy city and appeared to many.
Now the centurion, and those who were with him watching Jesus, when they saw the earthquake, and the things that were done, feared exceedingly, saying, 'Truly this was the Son of God.'
Many women were there watching from afar, who had followed Jesus from Galilee, serving him.
Among them were Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of James and Joses, and the mother of the sons of Zebedee.
When evening had come, a rich man from Arimathaea, named Joseph, who himself was also Jesus' disciple came.
This man went to Pilate, and asked for Jesus' body. Then Pilate commanded the body to be given up.
Joseph took the body, and wrapped it in a clean linen cloth,
and laid it in his own new tomb, which he had cut out in the rock, and he rolled a great stone to the door of the tomb, and departed.
Mary Magdalene was there, and the other Mary, sitting opposite the tomb.
Now on the next day, which was the day after the Preparation Day, the chief priests and the Pharisees were gathered together to Pilate,
saying, 'Sir, we remember what that deceiver said while he was still alive: 'After three days I will rise again.'
Command therefore that the tomb be made secure until the third day, lest perhaps his disciples come at night and steal him away, and tell the people, 'He is risen from the dead;' and the last deception will be worse than the first.'
Pilate said to them, 'You have a guard. Go, make it as secure as you can.'
So they went with the guard and made the tomb secure, sealing the stone.
As they spoke to the people, the priests and the captain of the temple and the Sadducees came to them,
being upset because they taught the people and proclaimed in Jesus the resurrection from the dead.
They laid hands on them, and put them in custody until the next day, for it was now evening.
But many of those who heard the word believed, and the number of the men came to be about five thousand.
It happened in the morning, that their rulers, elders, and scribes were gathered together in Jerusalem.
Annas the high priest was there, with Caiaphas, John, Alexander, and as many as were relatives of the high priest.
When they had stood them in the middle of them, they inquired, 'By what power, or in what name, have you done this?'
Then Peter, filled with the Holy Spirit, said to them, 'You rulers of the people, and elders of Israel,
if we are examined today concerning a good deed done to a crippled man, by what means this man has been healed,
be it known to you all, and to all the people of Israel, that in the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom you crucified, whom God raised from the dead, in him does this man stand here before you whole.
He is 'the stone which was regarded as worthless by you, the builders, which has become the head of the corner.'
There is salvation in none other, for neither is there any other name under heaven, that is given among men, by which we must be saved!'
Now when they saw the boldness of Peter and John, and had perceived that they were unlearned and ignorant men, they marveled. They recognized that they had been with Jesus.
Seeing the man who was healed standing with them, they could say nothing against it.
But when they had commanded them to go aside out of the council, they conferred among themselves,
saying, 'What shall we do to these men? Because indeed a notable miracle has been done through them, as can be plainly seen by all who dwell in Jerusalem, and we can't deny it.
But so that this spreads no further among the people, let's threaten them, that from now on they don't speak to anyone in this name.'
They called them, and commanded them not to speak at all nor teach in the name of Jesus.
But Peter and John answered them, 'Whether it is right in the sight of God to listen to you rather than to God, judge for yourselves,
for we can't help telling the things which we saw and heard.'
When they had further threatened them, they let them go, finding no way to punish them, because of the people; for everyone glorified God for that which was done.
For the man on whom this miracle of healing was performed was more than forty years old.
Being let go, they came to their own company, and reported all that the chief priests and the elders had said to them.
When they heard it, they lifted up their voice to God with one accord, and said, 'O Lord, you are God, who made the heaven, the earth, the sea, and all that is in them;
who by the mouth of your servant, David, said, 'Why do the nations rage, and the peoples plot a vain thing?
The kings of the earth take a stand, and the rulers take council together, against the Lord, and against his Christ
'For truly, in this city against your holy servant, Jesus, whom you anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and the people of Israel, were gathered together
to do whatever your hand and your council foreordained to happen.
Now, Lord, look at their threats, and grant to your servants to speak your word with all boldness,
while you stretch out your hand to heal; and that signs and wonders may be done through the name of your holy Servant Jesus.'
When they had prayed, the place was shaken where they were gathered together. They were all filled with the Holy Spirit, and they spoke the word of God with boldness.
The multitude of those who believed were of one heart and soul. Not one of them claimed that anything of the things which he possessed was his own, but they had all things in common.
With great power, the apostles gave their testimony of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus. Great grace was on them all.
For neither was there among them any who lacked, for as many as were owners of lands or houses sold them, and brought the proceeds of the things that were sold,
and laid them at the apostles' feet, and distribution was made to each, according as anyone had need.
Joses, who by the apostles was surnamed Barnabas (which is, being interpreted, Son of Encouragement), a Levite, a man of Cyprus by race,
having a field, sold it, and brought the money and laid it at the apostles' feet.
Let not many of you be teachers, my brothers, knowing that we will receive heavier judgment.
For in many things we all stumble. If anyone doesn't stumble in word, the same is a perfect man, able to bridle the whole body also.
Indeed, we put bits into the horses' mouths so that they may obey us, and we guide their whole body.
Behold, the ships also, though they are so big and are driven by fierce winds, are yet guided by a very small rudder, wherever the pilot desires.
So the tongue is also a little member, and boasts great things. See how a small fire can spread to a large forest!
And the tongue is a fire. The world of iniquity among our members is the tongue, which defiles the whole body, and sets on fire the course of nature, and is set on fire by Gehenna.
For every kind of animal, bird, creeping thing, and thing in the sea, is tamed, and has been tamed by mankind.
But nobody can tame the tongue. It is a restless evil, full of deadly poison.
With it we bless our God and Father, and with it we curse men, who are made in the image of God.
Out of the same mouth comes forth blessing and cursing. My brothers, these things ought not to be so.
Does a spring send out from the same opening fresh and bitter water?
Can a fig tree, my brothers, yield olives, or a vine figs? Thus no spring yields both salt water and fresh water.
Who is wise and understanding among you? Let him show by his good conduct that his deeds are done in gentleness of wisdom.
But if you have bitter jealousy and selfish ambition in your heart, don't boast and don't lie against the truth.
This wisdom is not that which comes down from above, but is earthly, sensual, and demonic.
For where jealousy and selfish ambition are, there is confusion and every evil deed.
But the wisdom that is from above is first pure, then peaceful, gentle, reasonable, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisy.
Now the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace by those who make peace.
A reed like a rod was given to me. Someone said, 'Rise, and measure God's temple, and the altar, and those who worship in it.
Leave out the court which is outside of the temple, and don't measure it, for it has been given to the nations. They will tread the holy city under foot for forty-two months.
I will give power to my two witnesses, and they will prophesy one thousand two hundred sixty days, clothed in sackcloth.'
These are the two olive trees and the two lampstands, standing before the Lord of the earth.
If anyone desires to harm them, fire proceeds out of their mouth and devours their enemies. If anyone desires to harm them, he must be killed in this way.
These have the power to shut up the sky, that it may not rain during the days of their prophecy. They have power over the waters, to turn them into blood, and to strike the earth with every plague, as often as they desire.
When they have finished their testimony, the beast that comes up out of the abyss will make war with them, and overcome them, and kill them.
Their dead bodies will be in the street of the great city, which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where also their Lord was crucified.
From among the peoples, tribes, languages, and nations people will look at their dead bodies for three and a half days, and will not allow their dead bodies to be laid in a tomb.
Those who dwell on the earth rejoice over them, and they will be glad. They will give gifts to one another, because these two prophets tormented those who dwell on the earth.
After the three and a half days, the breath of life from God entered into them, and they stood on their feet. Great fear fell on those who saw them.
I heard a loud voice from heaven saying to them, 'Come up here!' They went up into heaven in the cloud, and their enemies saw them.
In that day there was a great earthquake, and a tenth of the city fell. Seven thousand people were killed in the earthquake, and the rest were terrified, and gave glory to the God of heaven.
The second woe is past. Behold, the third woe comes quickly.
The seventh angel sounded, and great voices in heaven followed, saying, 'The kingdom of the world has become the Kingdom of our Lord, and of his Christ. He will reign forever and ever!'
The twenty-four elders, who sit on their thrones before God's throne, fell on their faces and worshiped God,
saying: 'We give you thanks, Lord God, the Almighty, the one who is and who was; because you have taken your great power, and reigned.
The nations were angry, and your wrath came, as did the time for the dead to be judged, and to give your bondservants the prophets, their reward, as well as to the saints, and those who fear your name, to the small and the great; and to destroy those who destroy the earth.'
God's temple that is in heaven was opened, and the ark of the Lord's covenant was seen in his temple. Lightnings, sounds, thunders, an earthquake, and great hail followed.
After five days, the high priest, Ananias, came down with certain elders and an orator, one Tertullus. They informed the governor against Paul.
When he was called, Tertullus began to accuse him, saying, 'Seeing that by you we enjoy much peace, and that excellent measures are coming to this nation,
we accept it in all ways and in all places, most excellent Felix, with all thankfulness.
But, that I don't delay you, I entreat you to bear with us and hear a few words.
For we have found this man to be a plague, an instigator of insurrections among all the Jews throughout the world, and a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes.
He even tried to profane the temple, and we arrested him.

By examining him yourself you may ascertain all these things of which we accuse him.'
The Jews also joined in the attack, affirming that these things were so.
When the governor had beckoned to him to speak, Paul answered, 'Because I know that you have been a judge of this nation for many years, I cheerfully make my defense,
seeing that you can recognize that it is not more than twelve days since I went up to worship at Jerusalem.
In the temple they didn't find me disputing with anyone or stirring up a crowd, either in the synagogues, or in the city.
Nor can they prove to you the things of which they now accuse me.
But this I confess to you, that after the Way, which they call a sect, so I serve the God of our fathers, believing all things which are according to the law, and which are written in the prophets;
having hope toward God, which these also themselves look for, that there will be a resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust.
Herein I also practice always having a conscience void of offense toward God and men.
Now after some years, I came to bring gifts for the needy to my nation, and offerings;
amid which certain Jews from Asia found me purified in the temple, not with a mob, nor with turmoil.
They ought to have been here before you, and to make accusation, if they had anything against me.
Or else let these men themselves say what injustice they found in me when I stood before the council,
unless it is for this one thing that I cried standing among them, 'Concerning the resurrection of the dead I am being judged before you today!''
But Felix, having more exact knowledge concerning the Way, deferred them, saying, 'When Lysias, the commanding officer, comes down, I will decide your case.'
He ordered the centurion that Paul should be kept in custody, and should have some privileges, and not to forbid any of his friends to serve him or to visit him.
But after some days, Felix came with Drusilla, his wife, who was a Jewess, and sent for Paul, and heard him concerning the faith in Christ Jesus.
As he reasoned about righteousness, self-control, and the judgment to come, Felix was terrified, and answered, 'Go your way for this time, and when it is convenient for me, I will summon you.'
Meanwhile, he also hoped that money would be given to him by Paul, that he might release him. Therefore also he sent for him more often, and talked with him.
But when two years were fulfilled, Felix was succeeded by Porcius Festus, and desiring to gain favor with the Jews, Felix left Paul in bonds.
Being therefore justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ;
through whom we also have our access by faith into this grace in which we stand. We rejoice in hope of the glory of God.
Not only this, but we also rejoice in our sufferings, knowing that suffering works perseverance;
and perseverance, proven character; and proven character, hope:
and hope doesn't disappoint us, because God's love has been poured out into our hearts through the Holy Spirit who was given to us.
For while we were yet weak, at the right time Christ died for the ungodly.
For one will hardly die for a righteous man. Yet perhaps for a righteous person someone would even dare to die.
But God commends his own love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us.
Much more then, being now justified by his blood, we will be saved from God's wrath through him.
For if, while we were enemies, we were reconciled to God through the death of his Son, much more, being reconciled, we will be saved by his life.
Not only so, but we also rejoice in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we have now received the reconciliation.
Therefore, as sin entered into the world through one man, and death through sin; and so death passed to all men, because all sinned.
For until the law, sin was in the world; but sin is not charged when there is no law.
Nevertheless death reigned from Adam until Moses, even over those whose sins weren't like Adam's disobedience, who is a foreshadowing of him who was to come.
But the free gift isn't like the trespass. For if by the trespass of the one the many died, much more did the grace of God, and the gift by the grace of the one man, Jesus Christ, abound to the many.
The gift is not as through one who sinned: for the judgment came by one to condemnation, but the free gift came of many trespasses to justification.
For if by the trespass of the one, death reigned through the one; so much more will those who receive the abundance of grace and of the gift of righteousness reign in life through the one, Jesus Christ.
So then as through one trespass, all men were condemned; even so through one act of righteousness, all men were justified to life.
For as through the one man's disobedience many were made sinners, even so through the obedience of the one, many will be made righteous.
The law came in besides, that the trespass might abound; but where sin abounded, grace abounded more exceedingly;
that as sin reigned in death, even so grace might reign through righteousness to eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.
'Don't judge, so that you won't be judged.
For with whatever judgment you judge, you will be judged; and with whatever measure you measure, it will be measured to you.
Why do you see the speck that is in your brother's eye, but don't consider the beam that is in your own eye?
Or how will you tell your brother, 'Let me remove the speck from your eye;' and behold, the beam is in your own eye?
You hypocrite! First remove the beam out of your own eye, and then you can see clearly to remove the speck out of your brother's eye.
'Don't give that which is holy to the dogs, neither throw your pearls before the pigs, lest perhaps they trample them under their feet, and turn and tear you to pieces.
'Ask, and it will be given you. Seek, and you will find. Knock, and it will be opened for you.
For everyone who asks receives. He who seeks finds. To him who knocks it will be opened.
Or who is there among you, who, if his son asks him for bread, will give him a stone?
Or if he asks for a fish, who will give him a serpent?
If you then, being evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your Father who is in heaven give good things to those who ask him!
Therefore whatever you desire for men to do to you, you shall also do to them; for this is the law and the prophets.
'Enter in by the narrow gate; for wide is the gate and broad is the way that leads to destruction, and many are those who enter in by it.
How narrow is the gate, and restricted is the way that leads to life! Few are those who find it.
'Beware of false prophets, who come to you in sheep's clothing, but inwardly are ravening wolves.
By their fruits you will know them. Do you gather grapes from thorns, or figs from thistles?
Even so, every good tree produces good fruit; but the corrupt tree produces evil fruit.
A good tree can't produce evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree produce good fruit.
Every tree that doesn't grow good fruit is cut down, and thrown into the fire.
Therefore, by their fruits you will know them.
Not everyone who says to me, 'Lord, Lord,' will enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; but he who does the will of my Father who is in heaven.
Many will tell me in that day, 'Lord, Lord, didn't we prophesy in your name, in your name cast out demons, and in your name do many mighty works?'
Then I will tell them, 'I never knew you. Depart from me, you who work iniquity.'
'Everyone therefore who hears these words of mine, and does them, I will liken him to a wise man, who built his house on a rock.
The rain came down, the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat on that house; and it didn't fall, for it was founded on the rock.
Everyone who hears these words of mine, and doesn't do them will be like a foolish man, who built his house on the sand.
The rain came down, the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat on that house; and it fell--and great was its fall.'
It happened, when Jesus had finished saying these things, that the multitudes were astonished at his teaching,
for he taught them with authority, and not like the scribes.
So Pilate then took Jesus, and flogged him.
The soldiers twisted thorns into a crown, and put it on his head, and dressed him in a purple garment.
They kept saying, 'Hail, King of the Jews!' and they kept slapping him.
Then Pilate went out again, and said to them, 'Behold, I bring him out to you, that you may know that I find no basis for a charge against him.'
Jesus therefore came out, wearing the crown of thorns and the purple garment. Pilate said to them, 'Behold, the man!'
When therefore the chief priests and the officers saw him, they shouted, saying, 'Crucify! Crucify!' Pilate said to them, 'Take him yourselves, and crucify him, for I find no basis for a charge against him.'
The Jews answered him, 'We have a law, and by our law he ought to die, because he made himself the Son of God.'
When therefore Pilate heard this saying, he was more afraid.
He entered into the Praetorium again, and said to Jesus, 'Where are you from?' But Jesus gave him no answer.
Pilate therefore said to him, 'Aren't you speaking to me? Don't you know that I have power to release you, and have power to crucify you?'
Jesus answered, 'You would have no power at all against me, unless it were given to you from above. Therefore he who delivered me to you has greater sin.'
At this, Pilate was seeking to release him, but the Jews cried out, saying, 'If you release this man, you aren't Caesar's friend! Everyone who makes himself a king speaks against Caesar!'
When Pilate therefore heard these words, he brought Jesus out, and sat down on the judgment seat at a place called 'The Pavement,' but in Hebrew, 'Gabbatha.'
Now it was the Preparation Day of the Passover, at about the sixth hour. He said to the Jews, 'Behold, your King!'
They cried out, 'Away with him! Away with him! Crucify him!' Pilate said to them, 'Shall I crucify your King?' The chief priests answered, 'We have no king but Caesar!'
So then he delivered him to them to be crucified. So they took Jesus and led him away.
He went out, bearing his cross, to the place called 'The Place of a Skull,' which is called in Hebrew, 'Golgotha,'
where they crucified him, and with him two others, on either side one, and Jesus in the middle.
Pilate wrote a title also, and put it on the cross. There was written, 'JESUS OF NAZARETH, THE KING OF THE JEWS.'
Therefore many of the Jews read this title, for the place where Jesus was crucified was near the city; and it was written in Hebrew, in Latin, and in Greek.
The chief priests of the Jews therefore said to Pilate, 'Don't write, 'The King of the Jews,' but, 'he said, I am King of the Jews.''
Pilate answered, 'What I have written, I have written.'
Then the soldiers, when they had crucified Jesus, took his garments and made four parts, to every soldier a part; and also the coat. Now the coat was without seam, woven from the top throughout.
Then they said to one another, 'Let's not tear it, but cast lots for it to decide whose it will be,' that the Scripture might be fulfilled, which says, 'They parted my garments among them. For my cloak they cast lots.' Therefore the soldiers did these things.
But there were standing by the cross of Jesus his mother, and his mother's sister, Mary the wife of Clopas, and Mary Magdalene.
Therefore when Jesus saw his mother, and the disciple whom he loved standing there, he said to his mother, 'Woman, behold your son!'
Then he said to the disciple, 'Behold, your mother!' From that hour, the disciple took her to his own home.
After this, Jesus, seeing that all things were now finished, that the Scripture might be fulfilled, said, 'I am thirsty.'
Now a vessel full of vinegar was set there; so they put a sponge full of the vinegar on hyssop, and held it at his mouth.
When Jesus therefore had received the vinegar, he said, 'It is finished.' He bowed his head, and gave up his spirit.
Therefore the Jews, because it was the Preparation Day, so that the bodies wouldn't remain on the cross on the Sabbath (for that Sabbath was a special one), asked of Pilate that their legs might be broken, and that they might be taken away.
Therefore the soldiers came, and broke the legs of the first, and of the other who was crucified with him;
but when they came to Jesus, and saw that he was already dead, they didn't break his legs.
However one of the soldiers pierced his side with a spear, and immediately blood and water came out.
He who has seen has testified, and his testimony is true. He knows that he tells the truth, that you may believe.
For these things happened, that the Scripture might be fulfilled, 'A bone of him will not be broken.'
Again another Scripture says, 'They will look on him whom they pierced.'
After these things, Joseph of Arimathaea, being a disciple of Jesus, but secretly for fear of the Jews, asked of Pilate that he might take away Jesus' body. Pilate gave him permission. He came therefore and took away his body.
Nicodemus, who at first came to Jesus by night, also came bringing a mixture of myrrh and aloes, about a hundred pounds.
So they took Jesus' body, and bound it in linen cloths with the spices, as the custom of the Jews is to bury.
Now in the place where he was crucified there was a garden. In the garden was a new tomb in which no man had ever yet been laid.
Then because of the Jews' Preparation Day (for the tomb was near at hand) they laid Jesus there.
Let every soul be in subjection to the higher authorities, for there is no authority except from God, and those who exist are ordained by God.
Therefore he who resists the authority, withstands the ordinance of God; and those who withstand will receive to themselves judgment.
For rulers are not a terror to the good work, but to the evil. Do you desire to have no fear of the authority? Do that which is good, and you will have praise from the same,
for he is a servant of God to you for good. But if you do that which is evil, be afraid, for he doesn't bear the sword in vain; for he is a servant of God, an avenger for wrath to him who does evil.
Therefore you need to be in subjection, not only because of the wrath, but also for conscience' sake.
For this reason you also pay taxes, for they are servants of God's service, attending continually on this very thing.
Give therefore to everyone what you owe: taxes to whom taxes are due; customs to whom customs; respect to whom respect; honor to whom honor.
Owe no one anything, except to love one another; for he who loves his neighbor has fulfilled the law.
For the commandments, 'You shall not commit adultery,' 'You shall not murder,' 'You shall not steal,' 'You shall not give false testimony,' 'You shall not covet,'
Love doesn't harm a neighbor. Love therefore is the fulfillment of the law.
Do this, knowing the time, that it is already time for you to awaken out of sleep, for salvation is now nearer to us than when we first believed.
The night is far gone, and the day is near. Let's therefore throw off the works of darkness, and let's put on the armor of light.
Let us walk properly, as in the day; not in reveling and drunkenness, not in sexual promiscuity and lustful acts, and not in strife and jealousy.
But put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the flesh, for its lusts.
It happened that when Jesus had finished directing his twelve disciples, he departed from there to teach and preach in their cities.
Now when John heard in the prison the works of Christ, he sent two of his disciples
and said to him, 'Are you he who comes, or should we look for another?'
Jesus answered them, 'Go and tell John the things which you hear and see:
the blind receive their sight, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear,
Blessed is he who finds no occasion for stumbling in me.'
As these went their way, Jesus began to say to the multitudes concerning John, 'What did you go out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken by the wind?
But what did you go out to see? A man in soft clothing? Behold, those who wear soft clothing are in king's houses.
But why did you go out? To see a prophet? Yes, I tell you, and much more than a prophet.
For this is he, of whom it is written, 'Behold, I send my messenger before your face, who will prepare your way before you.'
Most certainly I tell you, among those who are born of women there has not arisen anyone greater than John the Baptizer; yet he who is least in the Kingdom of Heaven is greater than he.
From the days of John the Baptizer until now, the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force.
For all the prophets and the law prophesied until John.
If you are willing to receive it, this is Elijah, who is to come.
He who has ears to hear, let him hear.
'But to what shall I compare this generation? It is like children sitting in the marketplaces, who call to their companions
and say, 'We played the flute for you, and you didn't dance. We mourned for you, and you didn't lament.'
For John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, 'He has a demon.'
The Son of Man came eating and drinking, and they say, 'Behold, a gluttonous man and a drunkard, a friend of tax collectors and sinners!' But wisdom is justified by her children.'
Then he began to denounce the cities in which most of his mighty works had been done, because they didn't repent.
'Woe to you, Chorazin! Woe to you, Bethsaida! For if the mighty works had been done in Tyre and Sidon which were done in you, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes.
But I tell you, it will be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon on the day of judgment than for you.
You, Capernaum, who are exalted to heaven, you will go down to Hades. For if the mighty works had been done in Sodom which were done in you, it would have remained until this day.
But I tell you that it will be more tolerable for the land of Sodom, on the day of judgment, than for you.'
At that time, Jesus answered, 'I thank you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that you hid these things from the wise and understanding, and revealed them to infants.
Yes, Father, for so it was well-pleasing in your sight.
All things have been delivered to me by my Father. No one knows the Son, except the Father; neither does anyone know the Father, except the Son, and he to whom the Son desires to reveal him.
'Come to me, all you who labor and are heavily burdened, and I will give you rest.
Take my yoke upon you, and learn from me, for I am gentle and lowly in heart; and you will find rest for your souls.
For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light.'
After this, I saw four angels standing at the four corners of the earth, holding the four winds of the earth, so that no wind would blow on the earth, or on the sea, or on any tree.
I saw another angel ascend from the sunrise, having the seal of the living God. He cried with a loud voice to the four angels to whom it was given to harm the earth and the sea,
saying, 'Don't harm the earth, neither the sea, nor the trees, until we have sealed the bondservants of our God on their foreheads!'
I heard the number of those who were sealed, one hundred forty-four thousand, sealed out of every tribe of the children of Israel:
of the tribe of Judah were sealed twelve thousand, of the tribe of Reuben twelve thousand, of the tribe of Gad twelve thousand,
of the tribe of Asher twelve thousand, of the tribe of Naphtali twelve thousand, of the tribe of Manasseh twelve thousand,
of the tribe of Simeon twelve thousand, of the tribe of Levi twelve thousand, of the tribe of Issachar twelve thousand,
of the tribe of Zebulun twelve thousand, of the tribe of Joseph twelve thousand, of the tribe of Benjamin were sealed twelve thousand.
After these things I looked, and behold, a great multitude, which no man could number, out of every nation and of all tribes, peoples, and languages, standing before the throne and before the Lamb, dressed in white robes, with palm branches in their hands.
They cried with a loud voice, saying, 'Salvation be to our God, who sits on the throne, and to the Lamb!'
All the angels were standing around the throne, the elders, and the four living creatures; and they fell on their faces before his throne, and worshiped God,
saying, 'Amen! Blessing, glory, wisdom, thanksgiving, honor, power, and might, be to our God forever and ever! Amen.'
One of the elders answered, saying to me, 'These who are arrayed in white robes, who are they, and from where did they come?'
I told him, 'My lord, you know.' He said to me, 'These are those who came out of the great tribulation. They washed their robes, and made them white in the Lamb's blood.
Therefore they are before the throne of God, they serve him day and night in his temple. He who sits on the throne will spread his tabernacle over them.
They will never be hungry, neither thirsty any more; neither will the sun beat on them, nor any heat;
for the Lamb who is in the midst of the throne shepherds them, and leads them to springs of waters of life. And God will wipe away every tear from their eyes.'
Children, obey your parents in the Lord, for this is right.
'Honor your father and mother,' which is the first commandment with a promise:
'that it may be well with you, and you may live long on the earth.'
You fathers, don't provoke your children to wrath, but nurture them in the discipline and instruction of the Lord.
Servants, be obedient to those who according to the flesh are your masters, with fear and trembling, in singleness of your heart, as to Christ;
not in the way of service only when eyes are on you, as men pleasers; but as servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the heart;
with good will doing service, as to the Lord, and not to men;
knowing that whatever good thing each one does, he will receive the same again from the Lord, whether he is bound or free.
You masters, do the same things to them, and give up threatening, knowing that he who is both their Master and yours is in heaven, and there is no partiality with him.
Finally, be strong in the Lord, and in the strength of his might.
Put on the whole armor of God, that you may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil.
For our wrestling is not against flesh and blood, but against the principalities, against the powers, against the world's rulers of the darkness of this age, and against the spiritual forces of wickedness in the heavenly places.
Therefore, put on the whole armor of God, that you may be able to withstand in the evil day, and, having done all, to stand.
Stand therefore, having the utility belt of truth buckled around your waist, and having put on the breastplate of righteousness,
and having fitted your feet with the preparation of the Good News of peace;
above all, taking up the shield of faith, with which you will be able to quench all the fiery darts of the evil one.
And take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the spoken word of God;
with all prayer and requests, praying at all times in the Spirit, and being watchful to this end in all perseverance and requests for all the saints:
on my behalf, that utterance may be given to me in opening my mouth, to make known with boldness the mystery of the Good News,
for which I am an ambassador in chains; that in it I may speak boldly, as I ought to speak.
But that you also may know my affairs, how I am doing, Tychicus, the beloved brother and faithful servant in the Lord, will make known to you all things;
whom I have sent to you for this very purpose, that you may know our state, and that he may comfort your hearts.
Peace be to the brothers, and love with faith, from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Grace be with all those who love our Lord Jesus Christ with incorruptible love. Amen.
Saul was consenting to his death. A great persecution arose against the assembly which was in Jerusalem in that day. They were all scattered abroad throughout the regions of Judea and Samaria, except for the apostles.
Devout men buried Stephen, and lamented greatly over him.
But Saul ravaged the assembly, entering into every house, and dragged both men and women off to prison.
Therefore those who were scattered abroad went around preaching the word.
Philip went down to the city of Samaria, and proclaimed to them the Christ.
The multitudes listened with one accord to the things that were spoken by Philip, when they heard and saw the signs which he did.
For unclean spirits came out of many of those who had them. They came out, crying with a loud voice. Many who had been paralyzed and lame were healed.
There was great joy in that city.
But there was a certain man, Simon by name, who used to practice sorcery in the city, and amazed the people of Samaria, making himself out to be some great one,
to whom they all listened, from the least to the greatest, saying, 'This man is that great power of God.'
They listened to him, because for a long time he had amazed them with his sorceries.
But when they believed Philip preaching good news concerning the Kingdom of God and the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized, both men and women.
Simon himself also believed. Being baptized, he continued with Philip. Seeing signs and great miracles occurring, he was amazed.
Now when the apostles who were at Jerusalem heard that Samaria had received the word of God, they sent Peter and John to them,
who, when they had come down, prayed for them, that they might receive the Holy Spirit;
for as yet he had fallen on none of them. They had only been baptized in the name of Christ Jesus.
Then they laid their hands on them, and they received the Holy Spirit.
Now when Simon saw that the Holy Spirit was given through the laying on of the apostles' hands, he offered them money,
saying, 'Give me also this power, that whoever I lay my hands on may receive the Holy Spirit.'
But Peter said to him, 'May your silver perish with you, because you thought you could obtain the gift of God with money!
You have neither part nor lot in this matter, for your heart isn't right before God.
Repent therefore of this, your wickedness, and ask God if perhaps the thought of your heart may be forgiven you.
For I see that you are in the gall of bitterness and in the bondage of iniquity.'
Simon answered, 'Pray for me to the Lord, that none of the things which you have spoken happen to me.'
They therefore, when they had testified and spoken the word of the Lord, returned to Jerusalem, and preached the Good News to many villages of the Samaritans.
But an angel of the Lord spoke to Philip, saying, 'Arise, and go toward the south to the way that goes down from Jerusalem to Gaza. This is a desert.'
He arose and went; and behold, there was a man of Ethiopia, a eunuch of great authority under Candace, queen of the Ethiopians, who was over all her treasure, who had come to Jerusalem to worship.
He was returning and sitting in his chariot, and was reading the prophet Isaiah.
The Spirit said to Philip, 'Go near, and join yourself to this chariot.'
Philip ran to him, and heard him reading Isaiah the prophet, and said, 'Do you understand what you are reading?'
He said, 'How can I, unless someone explains it to me?' He begged Philip to come up and sit with him.
Now the passage of the Scripture which he was reading was this, 'He was led as a sheep to the slaughter. As a lamb before his shearer is silent, so he doesn't open his mouth.
In his humiliation, his judgment was taken away. Who will declare His generation? For his life is taken from the earth.'
The eunuch answered Philip, 'Who is the prophet talking about? About himself, or about someone else?'
Philip opened his mouth, and beginning from this Scripture, preached to him Jesus.
As they went on the way, they came to some water, and the eunuch said, 'Behold, here is water. What is keeping me from being baptized?'

He commanded the chariot to stand still, and they both went down into the water, both Philip and the eunuch, and he baptized him.
When they came up out of the water, the Spirit of the Lord caught Philip away, and the eunuch didn't see him any more, for he went on his way rejoicing.
But Philip was found at Azotus. Passing through, he preached the Good News to all the cities, until he came to Caesarea.
But Saul, still breathing threats and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord, went to the high priest,
and asked for letters from him to the synagogues of Damascus, that if he found any who were of the Way, whether men or women, he might bring them bound to Jerusalem.
As he traveled, it happened that he got close to Damascus, and suddenly a light from the sky shone around him.
He fell on the earth, and heard a voice saying to him, 'Saul, Saul, why do you persecute me?'
He said, 'Who are you, Lord?' The Lord said, 'I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting.
But rise up, and enter into the city, and you will be told what you must do.'
The men who traveled with him stood speechless, hearing the sound, but seeing no one.
Saul arose from the ground, and when his eyes were opened, he saw no one. They led him by the hand, and brought him into Damascus.
He was without sight for three days, and neither ate nor drank.
Now there was a certain disciple at Damascus named Ananias. The Lord said to him in a vision, 'Ananias!' He said, 'Behold, it's me, Lord.'
The Lord said to him, 'Arise, and go to the street which is called Straight, and inquire in the house of Judah for one named Saul, a man of Tarsus. For behold, he is praying,
and in a vision he has seen a man named Ananias coming in, and laying his hands on him, that he might receive his sight.'
But Ananias answered, 'Lord, I have heard from many about this man, how much evil he did to your saints at Jerusalem.
Here he has authority from the chief priests to bind all who call on your name.'
But the Lord said to him, 'Go your way, for he is my chosen vessel to bear my name before the nations and kings, and the children of Israel.
For I will show him how many things he must suffer for my name's sake.'
Ananias departed, and entered into the house. Laying his hands on him, he said, 'Brother Saul, the Lord, who appeared to you on the road by which you came, has sent me, that you may receive your sight, and be filled with the Holy Spirit.'
Immediately something like scales fell from his eyes, and he received his sight. He arose and was baptized.
He took food and was strengthened. Saul stayed several days with the disciples who were at Damascus.
Immediately in the synagogues he proclaimed the Christ, that he is the Son of God.
All who heard him were amazed, and said, 'Isn't this he who in Jerusalem made havoc of those who called on this name? And he had come here intending to bring them bound before the chief priests!'
But Saul increased more in strength, and confounded the Jews who lived at Damascus, proving that this is the Christ.
When many days were fulfilled, the Jews conspired together to kill him,
but their plot became known to Saul. They watched the gates both day and night that they might kill him,
but his disciples took him by night, and let him down through the wall, lowering him in a basket.
When Saul had come to Jerusalem, he tried to join himself to the disciples; but they were all afraid of him, not believing that he was a disciple.
But Barnabas took him, and brought him to the apostles, and declared to them how he had seen the Lord in the way, and that he had spoken to him, and how at Damascus he had preached boldly in the name of Jesus.
He was with them entering into Jerusalem,
preaching boldly in the name of the Lord Jesus. but they were seeking to kill him.
When the brothers knew it, they brought him down to Caesarea, and sent him off to Tarsus.
So the assemblies throughout all Judea and Galilee and Samaria had peace, and were built up. They were multiplied, walking in the fear of the Lord and in the comfort of the Holy Spirit.
It happened, as Peter went throughout all those parts, he came down also to the saints who lived at Lydda.
There he found a certain man named Aeneas, who had been bedridden for eight years, because he was paralyzed.
Peter said to him, 'Aeneas, Jesus Christ heals you. Get up and make your bed!' Immediately he arose.
All who lived at Lydda and in Sharon saw him, and they turned to the Lord.
Now there was at Joppa a certain disciple named Tabitha, which when translated, means Dorcas. This woman was full of good works and acts of mercy which she did.
It happened in those days that she fell sick, and died. When they had washed her, they laid her in an upper chamber.
As Lydda was near Joppa, the disciples, hearing that Peter was there, sent two men to him, imploring him not to delay in coming to them.
Peter got up and went with them. When he had come, they brought him into the upper chamber. All the widows stood by him weeping, and showing the coats and garments which Dorcas had made while she was with them.
Peter put them all out, and kneeled down and prayed. Turning to the body, he said, 'Tabitha, get up!' She opened her eyes, and when she saw Peter, she sat up.
He gave her his hand, and raised her up. Calling the saints and widows, he presented her alive.
And it became known throughout all Joppa, and many believed in the Lord.
It happened, that he stayed many days in Joppa with one Simon, a tanner.
I saw that the Lamb opened one of the seven seals, and I heard one of the four living creatures saying, as with a voice of thunder, 'Come and see!'
And behold, a white horse, and he who sat on it had a bow. A crown was given to him, and he came forth conquering, and to conquer.
When he opened the second seal, I heard the second living creature saying, 'Come!'
Another came forth, a red horse. To him who sat on it was given power to take peace from the earth, and that they should kill one another. There was given to him a great sword.
When he opened the third seal, I heard the third living creature saying, 'Come and see!' And behold, a black horse, and he who sat on it had a balance in his hand.
I heard a voice in the midst of the four living creatures saying, 'A choenix of wheat for a denarius, and three choenix of barley for a denarius! Don't damage the oil and the wine!'
When he opened the fourth seal, I heard the fourth living creature saying, 'Come and see!'
And behold, a pale horse, and he who sat on it, his name was Death. Hades followed with him. Authority over one fourth of the earth, to kill with the sword, with famine, with death, and by the wild animals of the earth was given to him.
When he opened the fifth seal, I saw underneath the altar the souls of those who had been killed for the Word of God, and for the testimony of the Lamb which they had.
They cried with a loud voice, saying, 'How long, Master, the holy and true, until you judge and avenge our blood on those who dwell on the earth?'
A long white robe was given to each of them. They were told that they should rest yet for a while, until their fellow servants and their brothers, who would also be killed even as they were, should complete their course.
I saw when he opened the sixth seal, and there was a great earthquake. The sun became black as sackcloth made of hair, and the whole moon became as blood.
The stars of the sky fell to the earth, like a fig tree dropping its unripe figs when it is shaken by a great wind.
The sky was removed like a scroll when it is rolled up. Every mountain and island were moved out of their places.
The kings of the earth, the princes, the commanding officers, the rich, the strong, and every slave and free person, hid themselves in the caves and in the rocks of the mountains.
They told the mountains and the rocks, 'Fall on us, and hide us from the face of him who sits on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb,
for the great day of his wrath has come; and who is able to stand?'
Therefore I urge you, brothers, by the mercies of God, to present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which is your spiritual service.
Don't be conformed to this world, but be transformed by the renewing of your mind, so that you may prove what is the good, well-pleasing, and perfect will of God.
For I say, through the grace that was given me, to every man who is among you, not to think of himself more highly than he ought to think; but to think reasonably, as God has apportioned to each person a measure of faith.
For even as we have many members in one body, and all the members don't have the same function,
so we, who are many, are one body in Christ, and individually members one of another.
Having gifts differing according to the grace that was given to us, if prophecy, let us prophesy according to the proportion of our faith;
or service, let us give ourselves to service; or he who teaches, to his teaching;
or he who exhorts, to his exhorting: he who gives, let him do it with liberality; he who rules, with diligence; he who shows mercy, with cheerfulness.
Let love be without hypocrisy. Abhor that which is evil. Cling to that which is good.
In love of the brothers be tenderly affectionate one to another; in honor preferring one another;
not lagging in diligence; fervent in spirit; serving the Lord;
rejoicing in hope; enduring in troubles; continuing steadfastly in prayer;
contributing to the needs of the saints; given to hospitality.
Bless those who persecute you; bless, and don't curse.
Rejoice with those who rejoice. Weep with those who weep.
Be of the same mind one toward another. Don't set your mind on high things, but associate with the humble. Don't be wise in your own conceits.
Repay no one evil for evil. Respect what is honorable in the sight of all men.
If it is possible, as much as it is up to you, be at peace with all men.
Don't seek revenge yourselves, beloved, but give place to God's wrath. For it is written, 'Vengeance belongs to me; I will repay, says the Lord.'
Therefore 'If your enemy is hungry, feed him. If he is thirsty, give him a drink; for in doing so, you will heap coals of fire on his head.'
Don't be overcome by evil, but overcome evil with good.
He called to himself his twelve disciples, and gave them authority over unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal every disease and every sickness.
Now the names of the twelve apostles are these. The first, Simon, who is called Peter; Andrew, his brother; James the son of Zebedee; John, his brother;
Philip; Bartholomew; Thomas; Matthew the tax collector; James the son of Alphaeus; Lebbaeus, whose surname was Thaddaeus;
Simon the Canaanite; and Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed him.
Jesus sent these twelve out, and commanded them, saying, 'Don't go among the Gentiles, and don't enter into any city of the Samaritans.
Rather, go to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.
As you go, preach, saying, 'The Kingdom of Heaven is at hand!'
Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, and cast out demons. Freely you received, so freely give.
Don't take any gold, nor silver, nor brass in your money belts.
Take no bag for your journey, neither two coats, nor shoes, nor staff: for the laborer is worthy of his food.
Into whatever city or village you enter, find out who in it is worthy; and stay there until you go on.
As you enter into the household, greet it.
If the household is worthy, let your peace come on it, but if it isn't worthy, let your peace return to you.
Whoever doesn't receive you, nor hear your words, as you go out of that house or that city, shake off the dust from your feet.
Most certainly I tell you, it will be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment than for that city.
'Behold, I send you out as sheep in the midst of wolves. Therefore be wise as serpents, and harmless as doves.
But beware of men: for they will deliver you up to councils, and in their synagogues they will scourge you.
Yes, and you will be brought before governors and kings for my sake, for a testimony to them and to the nations.
But when they deliver you up, don't be anxious how or what you will say, for it will be given you in that hour what you will say.
For it is not you who speak, but the Spirit of your Father who speaks in you.
'Brother will deliver up brother to death, and the father his child. Children will rise up against parents, and cause them to be put to death.
You will be hated by all men for my name's sake, but he who endures to the end will be saved.
But when they persecute you in this city, flee into the next, for most certainly I tell you, you will not have gone through the cities of Israel, until the Son of Man has come.
'A disciple is not above his teacher, nor a servant above his lord.
It is enough for the disciple that he be like his teacher, and the servant like his lord. If they have called the master of the house Beelzebul, how much more those of his household!
Therefore don't be afraid of them, for there is nothing covered that will not be revealed; and hidden that will not be known.
What I tell you in the darkness, speak in the light; and what you hear whispered in the ear, proclaim on the housetops.
Don't be afraid of those who kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul. Rather, fear him who is able to destroy both soul and body in Gehenna.
'Aren't two sparrows sold for an assarion coin? Not one of them falls on the ground apart from your Father's will,
but the very hairs of your head are all numbered.
Therefore don't be afraid. You are of more value than many sparrows.
Everyone therefore who confesses me before men, him I will also confess before my Father who is in heaven.
But whoever denies me before men, him I will also deny before my Father who is in heaven.
'Don't think that I came to send peace on the earth. I didn't come to send peace, but a sword.
For I came to set a man at odds against his father, and a daughter against her mother, and a daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law.
A man's foes will be those of his own household.
He who loves father or mother more than me is not worthy of me; and he who loves son or daughter more than me isn't worthy of me.
He who doesn't take his cross and follow after me, isn't worthy of me.
He who seeks his life will lose it; and he who loses his life for my sake will find it.
He who receives you receives me, and he who receives me receives him who sent me.
He who receives a prophet in the name of a prophet will receive a prophet's reward. He who receives a righteous man in the name of a righteous man will receive a righteous man's reward.
Whoever gives one of these little ones just a cup of cold water to drink in the name of a disciple, most certainly I tell you he will in no way lose his reward.'
When Jesus had spoken these words, he went out with his disciples over the brook Kidron, where there was a garden, into which he and his disciples entered.
Now Judas, who betrayed him, also knew the place, for Jesus often met there with his disciples.
Judas then, having taken a detachment of soldiers and officers from the chief priests and the Pharisees, came there with lanterns, torches, and weapons.
Jesus therefore, knowing all the things that were happening to him, went forth, and said to them, 'Who are you looking for?'
They answered him, 'Jesus of Nazareth.' Jesus said to them, 'I am he.' Judas also, who betrayed him, was standing with them.
When therefore he said to them, 'I am he,' they went backward, and fell to the ground.
Again therefore he asked them, 'Who are you looking for?' They said, 'Jesus of Nazareth.'
Jesus answered, 'I told you that I am he. If therefore you seek me, let these go their way,'
that the word might be fulfilled which he spoke, 'Of those whom you have given me, I have lost none.'
Simon Peter therefore, having a sword, drew it, and struck the high priest's servant, and cut off his right ear. The servant's name was Malchus.
Jesus therefore said to Peter, 'Put the sword into its sheath. The cup which the Father has given me, shall I not surely drink it?'
So the detachment, the commanding officer, and the officers of the Jews, seized Jesus and bound him,
and led him to Annas first, for he was father-in-law to Caiaphas, who was high priest that year.
Now it was Caiaphas who advised the Jews that it was expedient that one man should perish for the people.
Simon Peter followed Jesus, as did another disciple. Now that disciple was known to the high priest, and entered in with Jesus into the court of the high priest;
but Peter was standing at the door outside. So the other disciple, who was known to the high priest, went out and spoke to her who kept the door, and brought in Peter.
Then the maid who kept the door said to Peter, 'Are you also one of this man's disciples?' He said, 'I am not.'
Now the servants and the officers were standing there, having made a fire of coals, for it was cold. They were warming themselves. Peter was with them, standing and warming himself.
The high priest therefore asked Jesus about his disciples, and about his teaching.
Jesus answered him, 'I spoke openly to the world. I always taught in synagogues, and in the temple, where the Jews always meet. I said nothing in secret.
Why do you ask me? Ask those who have heard me what I said to them. Behold, these know the things which I said.'
When he had said this, one of the officers standing by slapped Jesus with his hand, saying, 'Do you answer the high priest like that?'
Jesus answered him, 'If I have spoken evil, testify of the evil; but if well, why do you beat me?'
Annas sent him bound to Caiaphas, the high priest.
Now Simon Peter was standing and warming himself. They said therefore to him, 'You aren't also one of his disciples, are you?' He denied it, and said, 'I am not.'
One of the servants of the high priest, being a relative of him whose ear Peter had cut off, said, 'Didn't I see you in the garden with him?'
Peter therefore denied it again, and immediately the rooster crowed.
They led Jesus therefore from Caiaphas into the Praetorium. It was early, and they themselves didn't enter into the Praetorium, that they might not be defiled, but might eat the Passover.
Pilate therefore went out to them, and said, 'What accusation do you bring against this man?'
They answered him, 'If this man weren't an evildoer, we wouldn't have delivered him up to you.'
Pilate therefore said to them, 'Take him yourselves, and judge him according to your law.' Therefore the Jews said to him, 'It is not lawful for us to put anyone to death,'
that the word of Jesus might be fulfilled, which he spoke, signifying by what kind of death he should die.
Pilate therefore entered again into the Praetorium, called Jesus, and said to him, 'Are you the King of the Jews?'
Jesus answered him, 'Do you say this by yourself, or did others tell you about me?'
Pilate answered, 'I'm not a Jew, am I? Your own nation and the chief priests delivered you to me. What have you done?'
Jesus answered, 'My Kingdom is not of this world. If my Kingdom were of this world, then my servants would fight, that I wouldn't be delivered to the Jews. But now my Kingdom is not from here.'
Pilate therefore said to him, 'Are you a king then?' Jesus answered, 'You say that I am a king. For this reason I have been born, and for this reason I have come into the world, that I should testify to the truth. Everyone who is of the truth listens to my voice.'
Pilate said to him, 'What is truth?' When he had said this, he went out again to the Jews, and said to them, 'I find no basis for a charge against him.
But you have a custom, that I should release someone to you at the Passover. Therefore do you want me to release to you the King of the Jews?'
Then they all shouted again, saying, 'Not this man, but Barabbas!' Now Barabbas was a robber.
Festus therefore, having come into the province, after three days went up to Jerusalem from Caesarea.
Then the high priest and the principal men of the Jews informed him against Paul, and they begged him,
asking a favor against him, that he would summon him to Jerusalem; plotting to kill him on the way.
However Festus answered that Paul should be kept in custody at Caesarea, and that he himself was about to depart shortly.
'Let them therefore,' said he, 'that are in power among you go down with me, and if there is anything wrong in the man, let them accuse him.'
When he had stayed among them more than ten days, he went down to Caesarea, and on the next day he sat on the judgment seat, and commanded Paul to be brought.
When he had come, the Jews who had come down from Jerusalem stood around him, bringing against him many and grievous charges which they could not prove,
while he said in his defense, 'Neither against the law of the Jews, nor against the temple, nor against Caesar, have I sinned at all.'
But Festus, desiring to gain favor with the Jews, answered Paul and said, 'Are you willing to go up to Jerusalem, and be judged by me there concerning these things?'
But Paul said, 'I am standing before Caesar's judgment seat, where I ought to be tried. I have done no wrong to the Jews, as you also know very well.
For if I have done wrong, and have committed anything worthy of death, I don't refuse to die; but if none of those things is true that they accuse me of, no one can give me up to them. I appeal to Caesar!'
Then Festus, when he had conferred with the council, answered, 'You have appealed to Caesar. To Caesar you shall go.'
Now when some days had passed, Agrippa the King and Bernice arrived at Caesarea, and greeted Festus.
As he stayed there many days, Festus laid Paul's case before the king, saying, 'There is a certain man left a prisoner by Felix;
about whom, when I was at Jerusalem, the chief priests and the elders of the Jews informed me, asking for a sentence against him.
To whom I answered that it is not the custom of the Romans to give up any man to destruction, before the accused has met the accusers face to face, and has had opportunity to make his defense concerning the matter laid against him.
When therefore they had come together here, I didn't delay, but on the next day sat on the judgment seat, and commanded the man to be brought.
Concerning whom, when the accusers stood up, they brought no charge of such things as I supposed;
but had certain questions against him about their own religion, and about one Jesus, who was dead, whom Paul affirmed to be alive.
Being perplexed how to inquire concerning these things, I asked whether he was willing to go to Jerusalem and there be judged concerning these matters.
But when Paul had appealed to be kept for the decision of the emperor, I commanded him to be kept until I could send him to Caesar.'
Agrippa said to Festus, 'I also would like to hear the man myself.' 'Tomorrow,' he said, 'you shall hear him.'
So on the next day, when Agrippa and Bernice had come with great pomp, and they had entered into the place of hearing with the commanding officers and principal men of the city, at the command of Festus, Paul was brought in.
Festus said, 'King Agrippa, and all men who are here present with us, you see this man, about whom all the multitude of the Jews petitioned me, both at Jerusalem and here, crying that he ought not to live any longer.
But when I found that he had committed nothing worthy of death, and as he himself appealed to the emperor I determined to send him.
Of whom I have no certain thing to write to my lord. Therefore I have brought him forth before you, and especially before you, King Agrippa, that, after examination, I may have something to write.
For it seems to me unreasonable, in sending a prisoner, not to also specify the charges against him.'
What then will we say that Abraham, our forefather, has found according to the flesh?
For if Abraham was justified by works, he has something to boast about, but not toward God.
For what does the Scripture say? 'Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to him for righteousness.'
Now to him who works, the reward is not counted as grace, but as debt.
But to him who doesn't work, but believes in him who justifies the ungodly, his faith is accounted for righteousness.
Even as David also pronounces blessing on the man to whom God counts righteousness apart from works,
'Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, whose sins are covered.
Blessed is the man whom the Lord will by no means charge with sin.'
Is this blessing then pronounced on the circumcised, or on the uncircumcised also? For we say that faith was accounted to Abraham for righteousness.
How then was it counted? When he was in circumcision, or in uncircumcision? Not in circumcision, but in uncircumcision.
He received the sign of circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of the faith which he had while he was in uncircumcision, that he might be the father of all those who believe, though they be in uncircumcision, that righteousness might also be accounted to them.
The father of circumcision to those who not only are of the circumcision, but who also walk in the steps of that faith of our father Abraham, which he had in uncircumcision.
For the promise to Abraham and to his seed that he should be heir of the world wasn't through the law, but through the righteousness of faith.
For if those who are of the law are heirs, faith is made void, and the promise is made of no effect.
For the law works wrath, for where there is no law, neither is there disobedience.
For this cause it is of faith, that it may be according to grace, to the end that the promise may be sure to all the seed, not to that only which is of the law, but to that also which is of the faith of Abraham, who is the father of us all.
As it is written, 'I have made you a father of many nations.' This is in the presence of him whom he believed: God, who gives life to the dead, and calls the things that are not, as though they were.
Who in hope believed against hope, to the end that he might become a father of many nations, according to that which had been spoken, 'So will your seed be.'
Without being weakened in faith, he didn't consider his own body, already having been worn out, (he being about a hundred years old), and the deadness of Sarah's womb.
Yet, looking to the promise of God, he didn't waver through unbelief, but grew strong through faith, giving glory to God,
and being fully assured that what he had promised, he was able also to perform.
Therefore it also was 'reckoned to him for righteousness.'
Now it was not written that it was accounted to him for his sake alone,
but for our sake also, to whom it will be accounted, who believe in him who raised Jesus, our Lord, from the dead,
who was delivered up for our trespasses, and was raised for our justification.
'Be careful that you don't do your charitable giving before men, to be seen by them, or else you have no reward from your Father who is in heaven.
Therefore when you do merciful deeds, don't sound a trumpet before yourself, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, that they may get glory from men. Most certainly I tell you, they have received their reward.
But when you do merciful deeds, don't let your left hand know what your right hand does,
so that your merciful deeds may be in secret, then your Father who sees in secret will reward you openly.
'When you pray, you shall not be as the hypocrites, for they love to stand and pray in the synagogues and in the corners of the streets, that they may be seen by men. Most certainly, I tell you, they have received their reward.
But you, when you pray, enter into your inner chamber, and having shut your door, pray to your Father who is in secret, and your Father who sees in secret will reward you openly.
In praying, don't use vain repetitions, as the Gentiles do; for they think that they will be heard for their much speaking.
Therefore don't be like them, for your Father knows what things you need, before you ask him.
Pray like this: 'Our Father in heaven, may your name be kept holy.
Let your Kingdom come. Let your will be done, as in heaven, so on earth.
Give us today our daily bread.
Forgive us our debts, as we also forgive our debtors.
Bring us not into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one. For yours is the Kingdom, the power, and the glory forever. Amen.'
'For if you forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you.
But if you don't forgive men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses.
'Moreover when you fast, don't be like the hypocrites, with sad faces. For they disfigure their faces, that they may be seen by men to be fasting. Most certainly I tell you, they have received their reward.
But you, when you fast, anoint your head, and wash your face;
so that you are not seen by men to be fasting, but by your Father who is in secret, and your Father, who sees in secret, will reward you.
'Don't lay up treasures for yourselves on the earth, where moth and rust consume, and where thieves break through and steal;
but lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust consume, and where thieves don't break through and steal;
for where your treasure is, there your heart will be also.
'The lamp of the body is the eye. If therefore your eye is sound, your whole body will be full of light.
But if your eye is evil, your whole body will be full of darkness. If therefore the light that is in you is darkness, how great is the darkness!
'No one can serve two masters, for either he will hate the one and love the other; or else he will be devoted to one and despise the other. You can't serve both God and Mammon.
Therefore, I tell you, don't be anxious for your life: what you will eat, or what you will drink; nor yet for your body, what you will wear. Isn't life more than food, and the body more than clothing?
See the birds of the sky, that they don't sow, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns. Your heavenly Father feeds them. Aren't you of much more value than they?
'Which of you, by being anxious, can add one moment to his lifespan?
Why are you anxious about clothing? Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow. They don't toil, neither do they spin,
yet I tell you that even Solomon in all his glory was not dressed like one of these.
But if God so clothes the grass of the field, which today exists, and tomorrow is thrown into the oven, won't he much more clothe you, you of little faith?
'Therefore don't be anxious, saying, 'What will we eat?', 'What will we drink?' or, 'With what will we be clothed?'
For the Gentiles seek after all these things, for your heavenly Father knows that you need all these things.
But seek first God's Kingdom, and his righteousness; and all these things will be given to you as well.
Therefore don't be anxious for tomorrow, for tomorrow will be anxious for itself. Each day's own evil is sufficient.
I saw a mighty angel coming down out of the sky, clothed with a cloud. A rainbow was on his head. His face was like the sun, and his feet like pillars of fire.
He had in his hand a little open book. He set his right foot on the sea, and his left on the land.
He cried with a loud voice, as a lion roars. When he cried, the seven thunders uttered their voices.
When the seven thunders sounded, I was about to write; but I heard a voice from the sky saying, 'Seal up the things which the seven thunders said, and don't write them.'
The angel who I saw standing on the sea and on the land lifted up his right hand to the sky,
and swore by him who lives forever and ever, who created heaven and the things that are in it, the earth and the things that are in it, and the sea and the things that are in it, that there will no longer be delay,
but in the days of the voice of the seventh angel, when he is about to sound, then the mystery of God is finished, as he declared to his servants, the prophets.
The voice which I heard from heaven, again speaking with me, said, 'Go, take the book which is open in the hand of the angel who stands on the sea and on the land.'
I went to the angel, telling him to give me the little book. He said to me, 'Take it, and eat it up. It will make your stomach bitter, but in your mouth it will be as sweet as honey.'
I took the little book out of the angel's hand, and ate it up. It was as sweet as honey in my mouth. When I had eaten it, my stomach was made bitter.
They told me, 'You must prophesy again over many peoples, nations, languages, and kings.'
Be imitators of me, even as I also am of Christ.
Now I praise you, brothers, that you remember me in all things, and hold firm the traditions, even as I delivered them to you.
But I would have you know that the head of every man is Christ, and the head of the woman is the man, and the head of Christ is God.
Every man praying or prophesying, having his head covered, dishonors his head.
But every woman praying or prophesying with her head unveiled dishonors her head. For it is one and the same thing as if she were shaved.
For if a woman is not covered, let her also be shorn. But if it is shameful for a woman to be shorn or shaved, let her be covered.
For a man indeed ought not to have his head covered, because he is the image and glory of God, but the woman is the glory of the man.
For man is not from woman, but woman from man;
for neither was man created for the woman, but woman for the man.
For this cause the woman ought to have authority on her head, because of the angels.
Nevertheless, neither is the woman independent of the man, nor the man independent of the woman, in the Lord.
For as woman came from man, so a man also comes through a woman; but all things are from God.
Judge for yourselves. Is it appropriate that a woman pray to God unveiled?
Doesn't even nature itself teach you that if a man has long hair, it is a dishonor to him?
But if a woman has long hair, it is a glory to her, for her hair is given to her for a covering.
But if any man seems to be contentious, we have no such custom, neither do God's assemblies.
But in giving you this command, I don't praise you, that you come together not for the better but for the worse.
For first of all, when you come together in the assembly, I hear that divisions exist among you, and I partly believe it.
For there also must be factions among you, that those who are approved may be revealed among you.
When therefore you assemble yourselves together, it is not the Lord's supper that you eat.
For in your eating each one takes his own supper first. One is hungry, and another is drunken.
What, don't you have houses to eat and to drink in? Or do you despise God's assembly, and put them to shame who don't have? What shall I tell you? Shall I praise you? In this I don't praise you.
For I received from the Lord that which also I delivered to you, that the Lord Jesus on the night in which he was betrayed took bread.
When he had given thanks, he broke it, and said, 'Take, eat. This is my body, which is broken for you. Do this in memory of me.'
In the same way he also took the cup, after supper, saying, 'This cup is the new covenant in my blood. Do this, as often as you drink, in memory of me.'
For as often as you eat this bread and drink this cup, you proclaim the Lord's death until he comes.
Therefore whoever eats this bread or drinks the Lord's cup in a manner unworthy of the Lord will be guilty of the body and the blood of the Lord.
But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of the bread, and drink of the cup.
For he who eats and drinks in an unworthy manner eats and drinks judgment to himself, if he doesn't discern the Lord's body.
For this cause many among you are weak and sickly, and not a few sleep.
For if we discerned ourselves, we wouldn't be judged.
But when we are judged, we are punished by the Lord, that we may not be condemned with the world.
Therefore, my brothers, when you come together to eat, wait one for another.
But if anyone is hungry, let him eat at home, lest your coming together be for judgment. The rest I will set in order whenever I come.
I command you therefore before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, who will judge the living and the dead at his appearing and his Kingdom:
preach the word; be urgent in season and out of season; reprove, rebuke, and exhort, with all patience and teaching.
For the time will come when they will not listen to the sound doctrine, but, having itching ears, will heap up for themselves teachers after their own lusts;
and will turn away their ears from the truth, and turn aside to fables.
But you be sober in all things, suffer hardship, do the work of an evangelist, and fulfill your ministry.
For I am already being offered, and the time of my departure has come.
I have fought the good fight. I have finished the course. I have kept the faith.
From now on, there is stored up for me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, will give to me on that day; and not to me only, but also to all those who have loved his appearing.
Be diligent to come to me soon,
for Demas left me, having loved this present world, and went to Thessalonica; Crescens to Galatia, and Titus to Dalmatia.
Only Luke is with me. Take Mark, and bring him with you, for he is useful to me for service.
But I sent Tychicus to Ephesus.
Bring the cloak that I left at Troas with Carpus when you come, and the books, especially the parchments.
Alexander, the coppersmith, did much evil to me. The Lord will repay him according to his works,
of whom you also must beware; for he greatly opposed our words.
At my first defense, no one came to help me, but all left me. May it not be held against them.
But the Lord stood by me, and strengthened me, that through me the message might be fully proclaimed, and that all the Gentiles might hear; and I was delivered out of the mouth of the lion.
And the Lord will deliver me from every evil work, and will preserve me for his heavenly Kingdom; to whom be the glory forever and ever. Amen.
Greet Prisca and Aquila, and the house of Onesiphorus.
Erastus remained at Corinth, but I left Trophimus at Miletus sick.
Be diligent to come before winter. Eubulus salutes you, as do Pudens, Linus, Claudia, and all the brothers.
The Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit. Grace be with you. Amen.
My brothers, don't hold the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ of glory with partiality.
For if a man with a gold ring, in fine clothing, comes into your synagogue, and a poor man in filthy clothing also comes in;
and you pay special attention to him who wears the fine clothing, and say, 'Sit here in a good place;' and you tell the poor man, 'Stand there,' or 'Sit by my footstool;'
haven't you shown partiality among yourselves, and become judges with evil thoughts?
Listen, my beloved brothers. Didn't God choose those who are poor in this world to be rich in faith, and heirs of the Kingdom which he promised to those who love him?
But you have dishonored the poor man. Don't the rich oppress you, and personally drag you before the courts?
Don't they blaspheme the honorable name by which you are called?
However, if you fulfill the royal law, according to the Scripture, 'You shall love your neighbor as yourself,' you do well.
But if you show partiality, you commit sin, being convicted by the law as transgressors.
For whoever keeps the whole law, and yet stumbles in one point, he has become guilty of all.
For he who said, 'Do not commit adultery,' Now if you do not commit adultery, but murder, you have become a transgressor of the law.
So speak, and so do, as men who are to be judged by a law of freedom.
For judgment is without mercy to him who has shown no mercy. Mercy triumphs over judgment.
What good is it, my brothers, if a man says he has faith, but has no works? Can faith save him?
And if a brother or sister is naked and in lack of daily food,
and one of you tells them, 'Go in peace, be warmed and filled;' and yet you didn't give them the things the body needs, what good is it?
Even so faith, if it has no works, is dead in itself.
Yes, a man will say, 'You have faith, and I have works.' Show me your faith without works, and I by my works will show you my faith.
You believe that God is one. You do well. The demons also believe, and shudder.
But do you want to know, vain man, that faith apart from works is dead?
Wasn't Abraham our father justified by works, in that he offered up Isaac his son on the altar?
You see that faith worked with his works, and by works faith was perfected;
and the Scripture was fulfilled which says, 'Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to him as righteousness;' and he was called the friend of God.
You see then that by works, a man is justified, and not only by faith.
In like manner wasn't Rahab the prostitute also justified by works, in that she received the messengers, and sent them out another way?
For as the body apart from the spirit is dead, even so faith apart from works is dead.
It happened, when Jesus had finished all these words, that he said to his disciples,
'You know that after two days the Passover is coming, and the Son of Man will be delivered up to be crucified.'
Then the chief priests, the scribes, and the elders of the people were gathered together in the court of the high priest, who was called Caiaphas.
They took counsel together that they might take Jesus by deceit, and kill him.
But they said, 'Not during the feast, lest a riot occur among the people.'
Now when Jesus was in Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper,
a woman came to him having an alabaster jar of very expensive ointment, and she poured it on his head as he sat at the table.
But when his disciples saw this, they were indignant, saying, 'Why this waste?
For this ointment might have been sold for much, and given to the poor.'
However, knowing this, Jesus said to them, 'Why do you trouble the woman? Because she has done a good work for me.
For you always have the poor with you; but you don't always have me.
For in pouring this ointment on my body, she did it to prepare me for burial.
Most certainly I tell you, wherever this Good News is preached in the whole world, what this woman has done will also be spoken of as a memorial of her.'
Then one of the twelve, who was called Judas Iscariot, went to the chief priests,
and said, 'What are you willing to give me, that I should deliver him to you?' They weighed out for him thirty pieces of silver.
From that time he sought opportunity to betray him.
Now on the first day of unleavened bread, the disciples came to Jesus, saying to him, 'Where do you want us to prepare for you to eat the Passover?'
He said, 'Go into the city to a certain person, and tell him, 'The Teacher says, 'My time is at hand. I will keep the Passover at your house with my disciples.'''
The disciples did as Jesus commanded them, and they prepared the Passover.
Now when evening had come, he was reclining at the table with the twelve disciples.
As they were eating, he said, 'Most certainly I tell you that one of you will betray me.'
They were exceedingly sorrowful, and each began to ask him, 'It isn't me, is it, Lord?'
He answered, 'He who dipped his hand with me in the dish, the same will betray me.
The Son of Man goes, even as it is written of him, but woe to that man through whom the Son of Man is betrayed! It would be better for that man if he had not been born.'
Judas, who betrayed him, answered, 'It isn't me, is it, Rabbi?' He said to him, 'You said it.'
As they were eating, Jesus took bread, gave thanks for it, and broke it. He gave to the disciples, and said, 'Take, eat; this is my body.'
He took the cup, gave thanks, and gave to them, saying, 'All of you drink it,
for this is my blood of the new covenant, which is poured out for many for the remission of sins.
But I tell you that I will not drink of this fruit of the vine from now on, until that day when I drink it anew with you in my Father's Kingdom.'
When they had sung a hymn, they went out to the Mount of Olives.
Then Jesus said to them, 'All of you will be made to stumble because of me tonight, for it is written, 'I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock will be scattered.'
But after I am raised up, I will go before you into Galilee.'
But Peter answered him, 'Even if all will be made to stumble because of you, I will never be made to stumble.'
Jesus said to him, 'Most certainly I tell you that tonight, before the rooster crows, you will deny me three times.'
Peter said to him, 'Even if I must die with you, I will not deny you.' All of the disciples also said likewise.
Then Jesus came with them to a place called Gethsemane, and said to his disciples, 'Sit here, while I go there and pray.'
He took with him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, and began to be sorrowful and severely troubled.
Then he said to them, 'My soul is exceedingly sorrowful, even to death. Stay here, and watch with me.'
He went forward a little, fell on his face, and prayed, saying, 'My Father, if it is possible, let this cup pass away from me; nevertheless, not what I desire, but what you desire.'
He came to the disciples, and found them sleeping, and said to Peter, 'What, couldn't you watch with me for one hour?
Watch and pray, that you don't enter into temptation. The spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak.'
Again, a second time he went away, and prayed, saying, 'My Father, if this cup can't pass away from me unless I drink it, your desire be done.'
He came again and found them sleeping, for their eyes were heavy.
He left them again, went away, and prayed a third time, saying the same words.
Then he came to his disciples, and said to them, 'Sleep on now, and take your rest. Behold, the hour is at hand, and the Son of Man is betrayed into the hands of sinners.
Arise, let's be going. Behold, he who betrays me is at hand.'
While he was still speaking, behold, Judas, one of the twelve, came, and with him a great multitude with swords and clubs, from the chief priest and elders of the people.
Now he who betrayed him gave them a sign, saying, 'Whoever I kiss, he is the one. Seize him.'
Immediately he came to Jesus, and said, 'Hail, Rabbi!' and kissed him.
Jesus said to him, 'Friend, why are you here?' Then they came and laid hands on Jesus, and took him.
Behold, one of those who were with Jesus stretched out his hand, and drew his sword, and struck the servant of the high priest, and struck off his ear.
Then Jesus said to him, 'Put your sword back into its place, for all those who take the sword will die by the sword.
Or do you think that I couldn't ask my Father, and he would even now send me more than twelve legions of angels?
How then would the Scriptures be fulfilled that it must be so?'
In that hour Jesus said to the multitudes, 'Have you come out as against a robber with swords and clubs to seize me? I sat daily in the temple teaching, and you didn't arrest me.
But all this has happened, that the Scriptures of the prophets might be fulfilled.' Then all the disciples left him, and fled.
Those who had taken Jesus led him away to Caiaphas the high priest, where the scribes and the elders were gathered together.
But Peter followed him from a distance, to the court of the high priest, and entered in and sat with the officers, to see the end.
Now the chief priests, the elders, and the whole council sought false testimony against Jesus, that they might put him to death;
and they found none. Even though many false witnesses came forward, they found none. But at last two false witnesses came forward,
and said, 'This man said, 'I am able to destroy the temple of God, and to build it in three days.''
The high priest stood up, and said to him, 'Have you no answer? What is this that these testify against you?'
But Jesus held his peace. The high priest answered him, 'I adjure you by the living God, that you tell us whether you are the Christ, the Son of God.'
Jesus said to him, 'You have said it. Nevertheless, I tell you, after this you will see the Son of Man sitting at the right hand of Power, and coming on the clouds of the sky.'
Then the high priest tore his clothing, saying, 'He has spoken blasphemy! Why do we need any more witnesses? Behold, now you have heard his blasphemy.
What do you think?' They answered, 'He is worthy of death!'
Then they spit in his face and beat him with their fists, and some slapped him,
saying, 'Prophesy to us, you Christ! Who hit you?'
Now Peter was sitting outside in the court, and a maid came to him, saying, 'You were also with Jesus, the Galilean!'
But he denied it before them all, saying, 'I don't know what you are talking about.'
When he had gone out onto the porch, someone else saw him, and said to those who were there, 'This man also was with Jesus of Nazareth.'
Again he denied it with an oath, 'I don't know the man.'
After a little while those who stood by came and said to Peter, 'Surely you are also one of them, for your speech makes you known.'
Then he began to curse and to swear, 'I don't know the man!' Immediately the rooster crowed.
Peter remembered the word which Jesus had said to him, 'Before the rooster crows, you will deny me three times.' He went out and wept bitterly.
But a certain man named Ananias, with Sapphira, his wife, sold a possession,
and kept back part of the price, his wife also being aware of it, and brought a certain part, and laid it at the apostles' feet.
But Peter said, 'Ananias, why has Satan filled your heart to lie to the Holy Spirit, and to keep back part of the price of the land?
While you kept it, didn't it remain your own? After it was sold, wasn't it in your power? How is it that you have conceived this thing in your heart? You haven't lied to men, but to God.'
Ananias, hearing these words, fell down and died. Great fear came on all who heard these things.
The young men arose and wrapped him up, and they carried him out and buried him.
About three hours later, his wife, not knowing what had happened, came in.
Peter answered her, 'Tell me whether you sold the land for so much.' She said, 'Yes, for so much.'
But Peter asked her, 'How is it that you have agreed together to tempt the Spirit of the Lord? Behold, the feet of those who have buried your husband are at the door, and they will carry you out.'
She fell down immediately at his feet, and died. The young men came in and found her dead, and they carried her out and buried her by her husband.
Great fear came on the whole assembly, and on all who heard these things.
By the hands of the apostles many signs and wonders were done among the people. They were all with one accord in Solomon's porch.
None of the rest dared to join them, however the people honored them.
More believers were added to the Lord, multitudes of both men and women.
They even carried out the sick into the streets, and laid them on cots and mattresses, so that as Peter came by, at the least his shadow might overshadow some of them.
Multitudes also came together from the cities around Jerusalem, bringing sick people, and those who were tormented by unclean spirits: and they were all healed.
But the high priest rose up, and all those who were with him (which is the sect of the Sadducees), and they were filled with jealousy,
and laid hands on the apostles, and put them in public custody.
But an angel of the Lord opened the prison doors by night, and brought them out, and said,
'Go stand and speak in the temple to the people all the words of this life.'
When they heard this, they entered into the temple about daybreak, and taught. But the high priest came, and those who were with him, and called the council together, and all the senate of the children of Israel, and sent to the prison to have them brought.
But the officers who came didn't find them in the prison. They returned and reported,
'We found the prison shut and locked, and the guards standing before the doors, but when we opened them, we found no one inside!'
Now when the high priest, the captain of the temple, and the chief priests heard these words, they were very perplexed about them and what might become of this.
One came and told them, 'Behold, the men whom you put in prison are in the temple, standing and teaching the people.'
Then the captain went with the officers, and brought them without violence, for they were afraid that the people might stone them.
When they had brought them, they set them before the council. The high priest questioned them,
saying, 'Didn't we strictly command you not to teach in this name? Behold, you have filled Jerusalem with your teaching, and intend to bring this man's blood on us.'
But Peter and the apostles answered, 'We must obey God rather than men.
The God of our fathers raised up Jesus, whom you killed, hanging him on a tree.
God exalted him with his right hand to be a Prince and a Savior, to give repentance to Israel, and remission of sins.
We are His witnesses of these things; and so also is the Holy Spirit, whom God has given to those who obey him.'
But they, when they heard this, were cut to the heart, and determined to kill them.
But one stood up in the council, a Pharisee named Gamaliel, a teacher of the law, honored by all the people, and commanded to put the apostles out for a little while.
He said to them, 'You men of Israel, be careful concerning these men, what you are about to do.
For before these days Theudas rose up, making himself out to be somebody; to whom a number of men, about four hundred, joined themselves: who was slain; and all, as many as obeyed him, were dispersed, and came to nothing.
After this man, Judas of Galilee rose up in the days of the enrollment, and drew away some people after him. He also perished, and all, as many as obeyed him, were scattered abroad.
Now I tell you, withdraw from these men, and leave them alone. For if this counsel or this work is of men, it will be overthrown.
But if it is of God, you will not be able to overthrow it, and you would be found even to be fighting against God!'
They agreed with him. Summoning the apostles, they beat them and commanded them not to speak in the name of Jesus, and let them go.
They therefore departed from the presence of the council, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer dishonor for Jesus' name.
Every day, in the temple and at home, they never stopped teaching and preaching Jesus, the Christ.
Finally, my brothers, rejoice in the Lord. To write the same things to you, to me indeed is not tiresome, but for you it is safe.
Beware of the dogs, beware of the evil workers, beware of the false circumcision.
For we are the circumcision, who worship God in the Spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh;
though I myself might have confidence even in the flesh. If any other man thinks that he has confidence in the flesh, I yet more:
circumcised the eighth day, of the stock of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, a Hebrew of Hebrews; concerning the law, a Pharisee;
concerning zeal, persecuting the assembly; concerning the righteousness which is in the law, found blameless.
However, what things were gain to me, these have I counted loss for Christ.
Yes most certainly, and I count all things to be loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus, my Lord, for whom I suffered the loss of all things, and count them nothing but refuse, that I may gain Christ
and be found in him, not having a righteousness of my own, that which is of the law, but that which is through faith in Christ, the righteousness which is from God by faith;
that I may know him, and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, becoming conformed to his death;
if by any means I may attain to the resurrection from the dead.
Not that I have already obtained, or am already made perfect; but I press on, if it is so that I may take hold of that for which also I was taken hold of by Christ Jesus.
Brothers, I don't regard myself as yet having taken hold, but one thing I do. Forgetting the things which are behind, and stretching forward to the things which are before,
I press on toward the goal for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.
Let us therefore, as many as are perfect, think this way. If in anything you think otherwise, God will also reveal that to you.
Nevertheless, to the extent that we have already attained, let us walk by the same rule. Let us be of the same mind.
Brothers, be imitators together of me, and note those who walk this way, even as you have us for an example.
For many walk, of whom I told you often, and now tell you even weeping, as the enemies of the cross of Christ,
whose end is destruction, whose god is the belly, and whose glory is in their shame, who think about earthly things.
For our citizenship is in heaven, from where we also wait for a Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ;
who will change the body of our humiliation to be conformed to the body of his glory, according to the working by which he is able even to subject all things to himself.
Now in the assembly that was at Antioch there were some prophets and teachers: Barnabas, Simeon who was called Niger, Lucius of Cyrene, Manaen the foster brother of Herod the tetrarch, and Saul.
As they served the Lord and fasted, the Holy Spirit said, 'Separate Barnabas and Saul for me, for the work to which I have called them.'
Then, when they had fasted and prayed and laid their hands on them, they sent them away.
So, being sent out by the Holy Spirit, they went down to Seleucia. From there they sailed to Cyprus.
When they were at Salamis, they proclaimed the word of God in the Jewish synagogues. They had also John as their attendant.
When they had gone through the island to Paphos, they found a certain sorcerer, a false prophet, a Jew, whose name was Bar Jesus,
who was with the proconsul, Sergius Paulus, a man of understanding. This man summoned Barnabas and Saul, and sought to hear the word of God.
But Elymas the sorcerer (for so is his name by interpretation) withstood them, seeking to turn aside the proconsul from the faith.
But Saul, who is also called Paul, filled with the Holy Spirit, fastened his eyes on him,
and said, 'Full of all deceit and all cunning, you son of the devil, you enemy of all righteousness, will you not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord?
Now, behold, the hand of the Lord is on you, and you will be blind, not seeing the sun for a season!' Immediately a mist and darkness fell on him. He went around seeking someone to lead him by the hand.
Then the proconsul, when he saw what was done, believed, being astonished at the teaching of the Lord.
Now Paul and his company set sail from Paphos, and came to Perga in Pamphylia. John departed from them and returned to Jerusalem.
But they, passing on from Perga, came to Antioch of Pisidia. They went into the synagogue on the Sabbath day, and sat down.
After the reading of the law and the prophets, the rulers of the synagogue sent to them, saying, 'Brothers, if you have any word of exhortation for the people, speak.'
Paul stood up, and beckoning with his hand said, 'Men of Israel, and you who fear God, listen.
The God of this people chose our fathers, and exalted the people when they stayed as aliens in the land of Egypt, and with an uplifted arm, he led them out of it.
For a period of about forty years he put up with them in the wilderness.
When he had destroyed seven nations in the land of Canaan, he gave them their land for an inheritance, for about four hundred fifty years.
After these things he gave them judges until Samuel the prophet.
Afterward they asked for a king, and God gave to them Saul the son of Kish, a man of the tribe of Benjamin, for forty years.
When he had removed him, he raised up David to be their king, to whom he also testified, 'I have found David the son of Jesse, a man after my heart, who will do all my will.'
From this man's seed, God has brought salvation to Israel according to his promise,
before his coming, when John had first preached the baptism of repentance to Israel.
As John was fulfilling his course, he said, 'What do you suppose that I am? I am not he. But behold, one comes after me the sandals of whose feet I am not worthy to untie.'
Brothers, children of the stock of Abraham, and those among you who fear God, the word of this salvation is sent out to you.
For those who dwell in Jerusalem, and their rulers, because they didn't know him, nor the voices of the prophets which are read every Sabbath, fulfilled them by condemning him.
Though they found no cause for death, they still asked Pilate to have him killed.
When they had fulfilled all things that were written about him, they took him down from the tree, and laid him in a tomb.
But God raised him from the dead,
and he was seen for many days by those who came up with him from Galilee to Jerusalem, who are his witnesses to the people.
We bring you good news of the promise made to the fathers,
that God has fulfilled the same to us, their children, in that he raised up Jesus. As it is also written in the second psalm, 'You are my Son. Today I have become your father.'
'Concerning that he raised him up from the dead, now no more to return to corruption, he has spoken thus: 'I will give you the holy and sure blessings of David.'
Therefore he says also in another psalm, 'You will not allow your Holy One to see decay.'
For David, after he had in his own generation served the counsel of God, fell asleep, and was laid with his fathers, and saw decay.
But he whom God raised up saw no decay.
Be it known to you therefore, brothers, that through this man is proclaimed to you remission of sins,
and by him everyone who believes is justified from all things, from which you could not be justified by the law of Moses.
Beware therefore, lest that come on you which is spoken in the prophets:
'Behold, you scoffers, and wonder, and perish; for I work a work in your days, a work which you will in no way believe, if one declares it to you.''
So when the Jews went out of the synagogue, the Gentiles begged that these words might be preached to them the next Sabbath.
Now when the synagogue broke up, many of the Jews and of the devout proselytes followed Paul and Barnabas; who, speaking to them, urged them to continue in the grace of God.
The next Sabbath almost the whole city was gathered together to hear the word of God.
But when the Jews saw the multitudes, they were filled with jealousy, and contradicted the things which were spoken by Paul, and blasphemed.
Paul and Barnabas spoke out boldly, and said, 'It was necessary that God's word should be spoken to you first. Since indeed you thrust it from you, and judge yourselves unworthy of eternal life, behold, we turn to the Gentiles.
For so has the Lord commanded us, saying, 'I have set you as a light for the Gentiles, that you should bring salvation to the uttermost parts of the earth.''
As the Gentiles heard this, they were glad, and glorified the word of God. As many as were appointed to eternal life believed.
The Lord's word was spread abroad throughout all the region.
But the Jews stirred up the devout and prominent women and the chief men of the city, and stirred up a persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and threw them out of their borders.
But they shook off the dust of their feet against them, and came to Iconium.
The disciples were filled with joy with the Holy Spirit.
Therefore leaving the doctrine of the first principles of Christ, let us press on to perfection--not laying again a foundation of repentance from dead works, of faith toward God,
of the teaching of baptisms, of laying on of hands, of resurrection of the dead, and of eternal judgment.
This will we do, if God permits.
For concerning those who were once enlightened and tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Spirit,
and tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the age to come,
and then fell away, it is impossible to renew them again to repentance; seeing they crucify the Son of God for themselves again, and put him to open shame.
For the land which has drunk the rain that comes often on it, and brings forth a crop suitable for them for whose sake it is also tilled, receives blessing from God;
but if it bears thorns and thistles, it is rejected and near being cursed, whose end is to be burned.
But, beloved, we are persuaded of better things for you, and things that accompany salvation, even though we speak like this.
For God is not unrighteous, so as to forget your work and the labor of love which you showed toward his name, in that you served the saints, and still do serve them.
We desire that each one of you may show the same diligence to the fullness of hope even to the end,
that you won't be sluggish, but imitators of those who through faith and patience inherited the promises.
For when God made a promise to Abraham, since he could swear by none greater, he swore by himself,
saying, 'Surely blessing I will bless you, and multiplying I will multiply you.'
Thus, having patiently endured, he obtained the promise.
For men indeed swear by a greater one, and in every dispute of theirs the oath is final for confirmation.
In this way God, being determined to show more abundantly to the heirs of the promise the immutability of his counsel, interposed with an oath;
that by two immutable things, in which it is impossible for God to lie, we may have a strong encouragement, who have fled for refuge to take hold of the hope set before us.
This hope we have as an anchor of the soul, a hope both sure and steadfast and entering into that which is within the veil;
where as a forerunner Jesus entered for us, having become a high priest forever after the order of Melchizedek.
It happened, that when he finished praying in a certain place, one of his disciples said to him, 'Lord, teach us to pray, just as John also taught his disciples.'
He said to them, 'When you pray, say, 'Our Father in heaven, may your name be kept holy. May your Kingdom come. May your will be done on Earth, as it is in heaven.
Give us day by day our daily bread.
Forgive us our sins, for we ourselves also forgive everyone who is indebted to us. Bring us not into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one.''
He said to them, 'Which of you, if you go to a friend at midnight, and tell him, 'Friend, lend me three loaves of bread,
for a friend of mine has come to me from a journey, and I have nothing to set before him,'
and he from within will answer and say, 'Don't bother me. The door is now shut, and my children are with me in bed. I can't get up and give it to you'?
I tell you, although he will not rise and give it to him because he is his friend, yet because of his persistence, he will get up and give him as many as he needs.
'I tell you, keep asking, and it will be given you. Keep seeking, and you will find. Keep knocking, and it will be opened to you.
For everyone who asks receives. He who seeks finds. To him who knocks it will be opened.
'Which of you fathers, if your son asks for bread, will give him a stone? Or if he asks for a fish, he won't give him a snake instead of a fish, will he?
Or if he asks for an egg, he won't give him a scorpion, will he?
If you then, being evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to those who ask him?'
He was casting out a demon, and it was mute. It happened, when the demon had gone out, the mute man spoke; and the multitudes marveled.
But some of them said, 'He casts out demons by Beelzebul, the prince of the demons.'
Others, testing him, sought from him a sign from heaven.
But he, knowing their thoughts, said to them, 'Every kingdom divided against itself is brought to desolation. A house divided against itself falls.
If Satan also is divided against himself, how will his kingdom stand? For you say that I cast out demons by Beelzebul.
But if I cast out demons by Beelzebul, by whom do your children cast them out? Therefore will they be your judges.
But if I by the finger of God cast out demons, then the Kingdom of God has come to you.
'When the strong man, fully armed, guards his own dwelling, his goods are safe.
But when someone stronger attacks him and overcomes him, he takes from him his whole armor in which he trusted, and divides his spoils.
'He that is not with me is against me. He who doesn't gather with me scatters.
The unclean spirit, when he has gone out of the man, passes through dry places, seeking rest, and finding none, he says, 'I will turn back to my house from which I came out.'
When he returns, he finds it swept and put in order.
Then he goes, and takes seven other spirits more evil than himself, and they enter in and dwell there. The last state of that man becomes worse than the first.'
It came to pass, as he said these things, a certain woman out of the multitude lifted up her voice, and said to him, 'Blessed is the womb that bore you, and the breasts which nursed you!'
But he said, 'On the contrary, blessed are those who hear the word of God, and keep it.'
When the multitudes were gathering together to him, he began to say, 'This is an evil generation. It seeks after a sign. No sign will be given to it but the sign of Jonah, the prophet.
For even as Jonah became a sign to the Ninevites, so will also the Son of Man be to this generation.
The Queen of the South will rise up in the judgment with the men of this generation, and will condemn them: for she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon; and behold, one greater than Solomon is here.
The men of Nineveh will stand up in the judgment with this generation, and will condemn it: for they repented at the preaching of Jonah, and behold, one greater than Jonah is here.
'No one, when he has lit a lamp, puts it in a cellar or under a basket, but on a stand, that those who come in may see the light.
The lamp of the body is the eye. Therefore when your eye is good, your whole body is also full of light; but when it is evil, your body also is full of darkness.
Therefore see whether the light that is in you isn't darkness.
If therefore your whole body is full of light, having no part dark, it will be wholly full of light, as when the lamp with its bright shining gives you light.'
Now as he spoke, a certain Pharisee asked him to dine with him. He went in, and sat at the table.
When the Pharisee saw it, he marveled that he had not first washed himself before dinner.
The Lord said to him, 'Now you Pharisees cleanse the outside of the cup and of the platter, but your inward part is full of extortion and wickedness.
You foolish ones, didn't he who made the outside make the inside also?
But give for gifts to the needy those things which are within, and behold, all things will be clean to you.
But woe to you Pharisees! For you tithe mint and rue and every herb, but you bypass justice and the love of God. You ought to have done these, and not to have left the other undone.
Woe to you Pharisees! For you love the best seats in the synagogues, and the greetings in the marketplaces.
Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you are like hidden graves, and the men who walk over them don't know it.'
One of the lawyers answered him, 'Teacher, in saying this you insult us also.'
He said, 'Woe to you lawyers also! For you load men with burdens that are difficult to carry, and you yourselves won't even lift one finger to help carry those burdens.
Woe to you! For you build the tombs of the prophets, and your fathers killed them.
So you testify and consent to the works of your fathers. For they killed them, and you build their tombs.
Therefore also the wisdom of God said, 'I will send to them prophets and apostles; and some of them they will kill and persecute,
that the blood of all the prophets, which was shed from the foundation of the world, may be required of this generation;
from the blood of Abel to the blood of Zachariah, who perished between the altar and the sanctuary.' Yes, I tell you, it will be required of this generation.
Woe to you lawyers! For you took away the key of knowledge. You didn't enter in yourselves, and those who were entering in, you hindered.'
As he said these things to them, the scribes and the Pharisees began to be terribly angry, and to draw many things out of him;
lying in wait for him, and seeking to catch him in something he might say, that they might accuse him.
'Don't let your heart be troubled. Believe in God. Believe also in me.
In my Father's house are many homes. If it weren't so, I would have told you. I am going to prepare a place for you.
If I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and will receive you to myself; that where I am, you may be there also.
Where I go, you know, and you know the way.'
Thomas said to him, 'Lord, we don't know where you are going. How can we know the way?'
Jesus said to him, 'I am the way, the truth, and the life. No one comes to the Father, except through me.
If you had known me, you would have known my Father also. From now on, you know him, and have seen him.'
Philip said to him, 'Lord, show us the Father, and that will be enough for us.'
Jesus said to him, 'Have I been with you such a long time, and do you not know me, Philip? He who has seen me has seen the Father. How do you say, 'Show us the Father?'
Don't you believe that I am in the Father, and the Father in me? The words that I tell you, I speak not from myself; but the Father who lives in me does his works.
Believe me that I am in the Father, and the Father in me; or else believe me for the very works' sake.
Most certainly I tell you, he who believes in me, the works that I do, he will do also; and he will do greater works than these, because I am going to my Father.
Whatever you will ask in my name, that will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son.
If you will ask anything in my name, I will do it.
If you love me, keep my commandments.
I will pray to the Father, and he will give you another Counselor, that he may be with you forever,--
the Spirit of truth, whom the world can't receive; for it doesn't see him, neither knows him. You know him, for he lives with you, and will be in you.
I will not leave you orphans. I will come to you.
Yet a little while, and the world will see me no more; but you will see me. Because I live, you will live also.
In that day you will know that I am in my Father, and you in me, and I in you.
One who has my commandments, and keeps them, that person is one who loves me. One who loves me will be loved by my Father, and I will love him, and will reveal myself to him.'
Judas (not Iscariot) said to him, 'Lord, what has happened that you are about to reveal yourself to us, and not to the world?'
Jesus answered him, 'If a man loves me, he will keep my word. My Father will love him, and we will come to him, and make our home with him.
He who doesn't love me doesn't keep my words. The word which you hear isn't mine, but the Father's who sent me.
I have said these things to you, while still living with you.
But the Counselor, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name, he will teach you all things, and will remind you of all that I said to you.
Peace I leave with you. My peace I give to you; not as the world gives, give I to you. Don't let your heart be troubled, neither let it be fearful.
You heard how I told you, 'I go away, and I come to you.' If you loved me, you would have rejoiced, because I said 'I am going to my Father;' for the Father is greater than I.
Now I have told you before it happens so that, when it happens, you may believe.
I will no more speak much with you, for the prince of the world comes, and he has nothing in me.
But that the world may know that I love the Father, and as the Father commanded me, even so I do. Arise, let us go from here.
The third day, there was a marriage in Cana of Galilee. Jesus' mother was there.
Jesus also was invited, with his disciples, to the marriage.
When the wine ran out, Jesus' mother said to him, 'They have no wine.'
Jesus said to her, 'Woman, what does that have to do with you and me? My hour has not yet come.'
His mother said to the servants, 'Whatever he says to you, do it.'
Now there were six water pots of stone set there after the Jews' manner of purifying, containing two or three metretes apiece.
Jesus said to them, 'Fill the water pots with water.' They filled them up to the brim.
He said to them, 'Now draw some out, and take it to the ruler of the feast.' So they took it.
When the ruler of the feast tasted the water now become wine, and didn't know where it came from (but the servants who had drawn the water knew), the ruler of the feast called the bridegroom,
and said to him, 'Everyone serves the good wine first, and when the guests have drunk freely, then that which is worse. You have kept the good wine until now!'
This beginning of his signs Jesus did in Cana of Galilee, and revealed his glory; and his disciples believed in him.
After this, he went down to Capernaum, he, and his mother, his brothers, and his disciples; and they stayed there a few days.
The Passover of the Jews was at hand, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.
He found in the temple those who sold oxen, sheep, and doves, and the changers of money sitting.
He made a whip of cords, and threw all out of the temple, both the sheep and the oxen; and he poured out the changers' money, and overthrew their tables.
To those who sold the doves, he said, 'Take these things out of here! Don't make my Father's house a marketplace!'
His disciples remembered that it was written, 'Zeal for your house will eat me up.'
The Jews therefore answered him, 'What sign do you show us, seeing that you do these things?'
Jesus answered them, 'Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up.'
The Jews therefore said, 'Forty-six years was this temple in building, and will you raise it up in three days?'
But he spoke of the temple of his body.
When therefore he was raised from the dead, his disciples remembered that he said this, and they believed the Scripture, and the word which Jesus had said.
Now when he was in Jerusalem at the Passover, during the feast, many believed in his name, observing his signs which he did.
But Jesus didn't trust himself to them, because he knew everyone,
and because he didn't need for anyone to testify concerning man; for he himself knew what was in man.
After he had finished speaking in the hearing of the people, he entered into Capernaum.
A certain centurion's servant, who was dear to him, was sick and at the point of death.
When he heard about Jesus, he sent to him elders of the Jews, asking him to come and save his servant.
When they came to Jesus, they begged him earnestly, saying, 'He is worthy for you to do this for him,
for he loves our nation, and he built our synagogue for us.'
Jesus went with them. When he was now not far from the house, the centurion sent friends to him, saying to him, 'Lord, don't trouble yourself, for I am not worthy for you to come under my roof.
Therefore I didn't even think myself worthy to come to you; but say the word, and my servant will be healed.
For I also am a man placed under authority, having under myself soldiers. I tell this one, 'Go!' and he goes; and to another, 'Come!' and he comes; and to my servant, 'Do this,' and he does it.'
When Jesus heard these things, he marveled at him, and turned and said to the multitude who followed him, 'I tell you, I have not found such great faith, no, not in Israel.'
Those who were sent, returning to the house, found that the servant who had been sick was well.
It happened soon afterwards, that he went to a city called Nain. Many of his disciples, along with a great multitude, went with him.
Now when he drew near to the gate of the city, behold, one who was dead was carried out, the only son of his mother, and she was a widow. Many people of the city were with her.
When the Lord saw her, he had compassion on her, and said to her, 'Don't cry.'
He came near and touched the coffin, and the bearers stood still. He said, 'Young man, I tell you, arise!'
He who was dead sat up, and began to speak. And he gave him to his mother.
Fear took hold of all, and they glorified God, saying, 'A great prophet has arisen among us!' and, 'God has visited his people!'
This report went out concerning him in the whole of Judea, and in all the surrounding region.
The disciples of John told him about all these things.
John, calling to himself two of his disciples, sent them to Jesus, saying, 'Are you the one who is coming, or should we look for another?'
When the men had come to him, they said, 'John the Baptizer has sent us to you, saying, 'Are you he who comes, or should we look for another?''
In that hour he cured many of diseases and plagues and evil spirits; and to many who were blind he gave sight.
Jesus answered them, 'Go and tell John the things which you have seen and heard: that the blind receive their sight, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the poor have good news preached to them.
Blessed is he who is not offended by me.'
When John's messengers had departed, he began to tell the multitudes about John, 'What did you go out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken by the wind?
But what did you go out to see? A man clothed in soft clothing? Behold, those who are gorgeously dressed, and live delicately, are in kings' courts.
But what did you go out to see? A prophet? Yes, I tell you, and much more than a prophet.
This is he of whom it is written, 'Behold, I send my messenger before your face, who will prepare your way before you.'
'For I tell you, among those who are born of women there is not a greater prophet than John the Baptizer, yet he who is least in the Kingdom of God is greater than he.'
When all the people and the tax collectors heard this, they declared God to be just, having been baptized with John's baptism.
But the Pharisees and the lawyers rejected the counsel of God, not being baptized by him themselves.
'To what then will I liken the people of this generation? What are they like?
They are like children who sit in the marketplace, and call one to another, saying, 'We piped to you, and you didn't dance. We mourned, and you didn't weep.'
For John the Baptizer came neither eating bread nor drinking wine, and you say, 'He has a demon.'
The Son of Man has come eating and drinking, and you say, 'Behold, a gluttonous man, and a drunkard; a friend of tax collectors and sinners!'
Wisdom is justified by all her children.'
One of the Pharisees invited him to eat with him. He entered into the Pharisee's house, and sat at the table.
Behold, a woman in the city who was a sinner, when she knew that he was reclining in the Pharisee's house, she brought an alabaster jar of ointment.
Standing behind at his feet weeping, she began to wet his feet with her tears, and she wiped them with the hair of her head, kissed his feet, and anointed them with the ointment.
Now when the Pharisee who had invited him saw it, he said to himself, 'This man, if he were a prophet, would have perceived who and what kind of woman this is who touches him, that she is a sinner.'
Jesus answered him, 'Simon, I have something to tell you.' He said, 'Teacher, say on.'
'A certain lender had two debtors. The one owed five hundred denarii, and the other fifty.
When they couldn't pay, he forgave them both. Which of them therefore will love him most?'
Simon answered, 'He, I suppose, to whom he forgave the most.' He said to him, 'You have judged correctly.'
Turning to the woman, he said to Simon, 'Do you see this woman? I entered into your house, and you gave me no water for my feet, but she has wet my feet with her tears, and wiped them with the hair of her head.
You gave me no kiss, but she, since the time I came in, has not ceased to kiss my feet.
You didn't anoint my head with oil, but she has anointed my feet with ointment.
Therefore I tell you, her sins, which are many, are forgiven, for she loved much. But to whom little is forgiven, the same loves little.'
He said to her, 'Your sins are forgiven.'
Those who sat at the table with him began to say to themselves, 'Who is this who even forgives sins?'
He said to the woman, 'Your faith has saved you. Go in peace.'
Putting away therefore all wickedness, all deceit, hypocrisies, envies, and all evil speaking,
as newborn babies, long for the pure milk of the Word, that you may grow thereby,
if indeed you have tasted that the Lord is gracious:
coming to him, a living stone, rejected indeed by men, but chosen by God, precious.
You also, as living stones, are built up as a spiritual house, to be a holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God through Jesus Christ.
Because it is contained in Scripture, 'Behold, I lay in Zion a chief cornerstone, chosen, and precious: He who believes in him will not be disappointed.'
For you who believe therefore is the honor, but for those who are disobedient, 'The stone which the builders rejected, has become the chief cornerstone,'
and, 'a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense.' For they stumble at the word, being disobedient, to which also they were appointed.
But you are a chosen race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people for God's own possession, that you may proclaim the excellence of him who called you out of darkness into his marvelous light:
who in time past were no people, but now are God's people, who had not obtained mercy, but now have obtained mercy.
Beloved, I beg you as foreigners and pilgrims, to abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul;
having good behavior among the nations, so in that of which they speak against you as evildoers, they may by your good works, which they see, glorify God in the day of visitation.
Therefore subject yourselves to every ordinance of man for the Lord's sake: whether to the king, as supreme;
or to governors, as sent by him for vengeance on evildoers and for praise to those who do well.
For this is the will of God, that by well-doing you should put to silence the ignorance of foolish men:
as free, and not using your freedom for a cloak of wickedness, but as bondservants of God.
Honor all men. Love the brotherhood. Fear God. Honor the king.
Servants, be in subjection to your masters with all fear; not only to the good and gentle, but also to the wicked.
For it is commendable if someone endures pain, suffering unjustly, because of conscience toward God.
For what glory is it if, when you sin, you patiently endure beating? But if, when you do well, you patiently endure suffering, this is commendable with God.
For to this you were called, because Christ also suffered for us, leaving you an example, that you should follow his steps,
who did not sin, 'neither was deceit found in his mouth.'
Who, when he was cursed, didn't curse back. When he suffered, didn't threaten, but committed himself to him who judges righteously;
who his own self bore our sins in his body on the tree, that we, having died to sins, might live to righteousness; by whose stripes you were healed.
For you were going astray like sheep; but now have returned to the Shepherd and Overseer of your souls.
Paul, an apostle (not from men, neither through man, but through Jesus Christ, and God the Father, who raised him from the dead),
and all the brothers who are with me, to the assemblies of Galatia:
Grace to you and peace from God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ,
who gave himself for our sins, that he might deliver us out of this present evil age, according to the will of our God and Father--
to whom be the glory forever and ever. Amen.
I marvel that you are so quickly deserting him who called you in the grace of Christ to a different 'good news';
and there isn't another 'good news.' Only there are some who trouble you, and want to pervert the Good News of Christ.
But even though we, or an angel from heaven, should preach to you any 'good news' other than that which we preached to you, let him be cursed.
As we have said before, so I now say again: if any man preaches to you any 'good news' other than that which you received, let him be cursed.
For am I now seeking the favor of men, or of God? Or am I striving to please men? For if I were still pleasing men, I wouldn't be a servant of Christ.
But I make known to you, brothers, concerning the Good News which was preached by me, that it is not according to man.
For neither did I receive it from man, nor was I taught it, but it came to me through revelation of Jesus Christ.
For you have heard of my way of living in time past in the Jews' religion, how that beyond measure I persecuted the assembly of God, and ravaged it.
I advanced in the Jews' religion beyond many of my own age among my countrymen, being more exceedingly zealous for the traditions of my fathers.
But when it was the good pleasure of God, who separated me from my mother's womb, and called me through his grace,
to reveal his Son in me, that I might preach him among the Gentiles, I didn't immediately confer with flesh and blood,
nor did I go up to Jerusalem to those who were apostles before me, but I went away into Arabia. Then I returned to Damascus.
Then after three years I went up to Jerusalem to visit Peter, and stayed with him fifteen days.
But of the other apostles I saw no one, except James, the Lord's brother.
Now about the things which I write to you, behold, before God, I'm not lying.
Then I came to the regions of Syria and Cilicia.
I was still unknown by face to the assemblies of Judea which were in Christ,
but they only heard: 'He who once persecuted us now preaches the faith that he once tried to destroy.'
And they glorified God in me.
There is therefore now no condemnation to those who are in Christ Jesus, who don't walk according to the flesh, but according to the Spirit.
For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus made me free from the law of sin and of death.
For what the law couldn't do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God did, sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh and for sin, he condemned sin in the flesh;
that the ordinance of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.
For those who live according to the flesh set their minds on the things of the flesh, but those who live according to the Spirit, the things of the Spirit.
For the mind of the flesh is death, but the mind of the Spirit is life and peace;
because the mind of the flesh is hostile towards God; for it is not subject to God's law, neither indeed can it be.
Those who are in the flesh can't please God.
But you are not in the flesh but in the Spirit, if it is so that the Spirit of God dwells in you. But if any man doesn't have the Spirit of Christ, he is not his.
If Christ is in you, the body is dead because of sin, but the spirit is alive because of righteousness.
But if the Spirit of him who raised up Jesus from the dead dwells in you, he who raised up Christ Jesus from the dead will also give life to your mortal bodies through his Spirit who dwells in you.
So then, brothers, we are debtors, not to the flesh, to live after the flesh.
For if you live after the flesh, you must die; but if by the Spirit you put to death the deeds of the body, you will live.
For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, these are children of God.
For you didn't receive the spirit of bondage again to fear, but you received the Spirit of adoption, by whom we cry, 'Abba! Father!'
The Spirit himself testifies with our spirit that we are children of God;
and if children, then heirs; heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ; if indeed we suffer with him, that we may also be glorified with him.
For I consider that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory which will be revealed toward us.
For the creation waits with eager expectation for the children of God to be revealed.
For the creation was subjected to vanity, not of its own will, but because of him who subjected it, in hope
that the creation itself also will be delivered from the bondage of decay into the liberty of the glory of the children of God.
For we know that the whole creation groans and travails in pain together until now.
Not only so, but ourselves also, who have the first fruits of the Spirit, even we ourselves groan within ourselves, waiting for adoption, the redemption of our body.
For we were saved in hope, but hope that is seen is not hope. For who hopes for that which he sees?
But if we hope for that which we don't see, we wait for it with patience.
In the same way, the Spirit also helps our weaknesses, for we don't know how to pray as we ought. But the Spirit himself makes intercession for us with groanings which can't be uttered.
He who searches the hearts knows what is on the Spirit's mind, because he makes intercession for the saints according to God.
We know that all things work together for good for those who love God, to those who are called according to his purpose.
For whom he foreknew, he also predestined to be conformed to the image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn among many brothers.
Whom he predestined, those he also called. Whom he called, those he also justified. Whom he justified, those he also glorified.
What then shall we say about these things? If God is for us, who can be against us?
He who didn't spare his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how would he not also with him freely give us all things?
Who could bring a charge against God's chosen ones? It is God who justifies.
Who is he who condemns? It is Christ who died, yes rather, who was raised from the dead, who is at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us.
Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Could oppression, or anguish, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword?
Even as it is written, 'For your sake we are killed all day long. We were accounted as sheep for the slaughter.'
No, in all these things, we are more than conquerors through him who loved us.
For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor things present, nor things to come, nor powers,
nor height, nor depth, nor any other created thing, will be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.
For the law, having a shadow of the good to come, not the very image of the things, can never with the same sacrifices year by year, which they offer continually, make perfect those who draw near.
Or else wouldn't they have ceased to be offered, because the worshippers, having been once cleansed, would have had no more consciousness of sins?
But in those sacrifices there is yearly reminder of sins.
For it is impossible that the blood of bulls and goats should take away sins.
Therefore when he comes into the world, he says, 'Sacrifice and offering you didn't desire, but you prepared a body for me;
You had no pleasure in whole burnt offerings and sacrifices for sin.
Then I said, 'Behold, I have come (in the scroll of the book it is written of me) to do your will, O God.''
Previously saying, 'Sacrifices and offerings and whole burnt offerings and sacrifices for sin you didn't desire, neither had pleasure in them' (those which are offered according to the law),
then he has said, 'Behold, I have come to do your will.' He takes away the first, that he may establish the second,
by which will we have been sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all.
Every priest indeed stands day by day serving and often offering the same sacrifices, which can never take away sins,
but he, when he had offered one sacrifice for sins forever, sat down on the right hand of God;
from that time waiting until his enemies are made the footstool of his feet.
For by one offering he has perfected forever those who are being sanctified.
The Holy Spirit also testifies to us, for after saying,
'This is the covenant that I will make with them: 'After those days,' says the Lord, 'I will put my laws on their heart, I will also write them on their mind;'' then he says,
'I will remember their sins and their iniquities no more.'
Now where remission of these is, there is no more offering for sin.
Having therefore, brothers, boldness to enter into the holy place by the blood of Jesus,
by the way which he dedicated for us, a new and living way, through the veil, that is to say, his flesh;
and having a great priest over the house of God,
let's draw near with a true heart in fullness of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and having our body washed with pure water,
let us hold fast the confession of our hope without wavering; for he who promised is faithful.
Let us consider how to provoke one another to love and good works,
not forsaking our own assembling together, as the custom of some is, but exhorting one another; and so much the more, as you see the Day approaching.
For if we sin willfully after we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more a sacrifice for sins,
but a certain fearful expectation of judgment, and a fierceness of fire which will devour the adversaries.
A man who disregards Moses' law dies without compassion on the word of two or three witnesses.
How much worse punishment, do you think, will he be judged worthy of, who has trodden under foot the Son of God, and has counted the blood of the covenant with which he was sanctified an unholy thing, and has insulted the Spirit of grace?
For we know him who said, 'Vengeance belongs to me,' says the Lord, 'I will repay.'
It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.
But remember the former days, in which, after you were enlightened, you endured a great struggle with sufferings;
partly, being exposed to both reproaches and oppressions; and partly, becoming partakers with those who were treated so.
For you both had compassion on me in my chains, and joyfully accepted the plundering of your possessions, knowing that you have for yourselves a better possession and an enduring one in the heavens.
Therefore don't throw away your boldness, which has a great reward.
For you need endurance so that, having done the will of God, you may receive the promise.
'In a very little while, he who comes will come, and will not wait.
But the righteous will live by faith. If he shrinks back, my soul has no pleasure in him.'
But we are not of those who shrink back to destruction, but of those who have faith to the saving of the soul.
Are we beginning again to commend ourselves? Or do we need, as do some, letters of commendation to you or from you?
You are our letter, written in our hearts, known and read by all men;
being revealed that you are a letter of Christ, served by us, written not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God; not in tablets of stone, but in tablets that are hearts of flesh.
Such confidence we have through Christ toward God;
not that we are sufficient of ourselves, to account anything as from ourselves; but our sufficiency is from God;
who also made us sufficient as servants of a new covenant; not of the letter, but of the Spirit. For the letter kills, but the Spirit gives life.
But if the service of death, written engraved on stones, came with glory, so that the children of Israel could not look steadfastly on the face of Moses for the glory of his face; which was passing away:
won't service of the Spirit be with much more glory?
For if the service of condemnation has glory, the service of righteousness exceeds much more in glory.
For most certainly that which has been made glorious has not been made glorious in this respect, by reason of the glory that surpasses.
For if that which passes away was with glory, much more that which remains is in glory.
Having therefore such a hope, we use great boldness of speech,
and not as Moses, who put a veil on his face, that the children of Israel wouldn't look steadfastly on the end of that which was passing away.
But their minds were hardened, for until this very day at the reading of the old covenant the same veil remains, because in Christ it passes away.
But to this day, when Moses is read, a veil lies on their heart.
But whenever one turns to the Lord, the veil is taken away.
Now the Lord is the Spirit and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty.
But we all, with unveiled face beholding as in a mirror the glory of the Lord, are transformed into the same image from glory to glory, even as from the Lord, the Spirit.
One of the seven angels who had the seven bowls came and spoke with me, saying, 'Come here. I will show you the judgment of the great prostitute who sits on many waters,
with whom the kings of the earth committed sexual immorality, and those who dwell in the earth were made drunken with the wine of her sexual immorality.'
He carried me away in the Spirit into a wilderness. I saw a woman sitting on a scarlet-colored animal, full of blasphemous names, having seven heads and ten horns.
The woman was dressed in purple and scarlet, and decked with gold and precious stones and pearls, having in her hand a golden cup full of abominations and the impurities of the sexual immorality of the earth.
And on her forehead a name was written, 'MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF THE PROSTITUTES AND OF THE ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH.'
I saw the woman drunken with the blood of the saints, and with the blood of the martyrs of Jesus. When I saw her, I wondered with great amazement.
The angel said to me, 'Why do you wonder? I will tell you the mystery of the woman, and of the beast that carries her, which has the seven heads and the ten horns.
The beast that you saw was, and is not; and is about to come up out of the abyss and to go into destruction. Those who dwell on the earth and whose names have not been written in the book of life from the foundation of the world will marvel when they see that the beast was, and is not, and shall be present.
Here is the mind that has wisdom. The seven heads are seven mountains, on which the woman sits.
They are seven kings. Five have fallen, the one is, the other has not yet come. When he comes, he must continue a little while.
The beast that was, and is not, is himself also an eighth, and is of the seven; and he goes to destruction.
The ten horns that you saw are ten kings who have received no kingdom as yet, but they receive authority as kings, with the beast, for one hour.
These have one mind, and they give their power and authority to the beast.
These will war against the Lamb, and the Lamb will overcome them, for he is Lord of lords, and King of kings. They also will overcome who are with him, called and chosen and faithful.'
He said to me, 'The waters which you saw, where the prostitute sits, are peoples, multitudes, nations, and languages.
The ten horns which you saw, and the beast, these will hate the prostitute, and will make her desolate, and will make her naked, and will eat her flesh, and will burn her utterly with fire.
For God has put in their hearts to do what he has in mind, and to be of one mind, and to give their kingdom to the beast, until the words of God should be accomplished.
The woman whom you saw is the great city, which reigns over the kings of the earth.'
But know this, that in the last days, grievous times will come.
For men will be lovers of self, lovers of money, boastful, arrogant, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy,
without natural affection, unforgiving, slanderers, without self-control, fierce, no lovers of good,
traitors, headstrong, conceited, lovers of pleasure rather than lovers of God;
holding a form of godliness, but having denied the power thereof. Turn away from these, also.
For of these are those who creep into houses, and take captive gullible women loaded down with sins, led away by various lusts,
always learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth.
Even as Jannes and Jambres opposed Moses, so do these also oppose the truth; men corrupted in mind, reprobate concerning the faith.
But they will proceed no further. For their folly will be evident to all men, as theirs also came to be.
But you did follow my teaching, conduct, purpose, faith, patience, love, steadfastness,
persecutions, and sufferings: those things that happened to me at Antioch, Iconium, and Lystra. I endured those persecutions. Out of them all the Lord delivered me.
Yes, and all who desire to live godly in Christ Jesus will suffer persecution.
But evil men and impostors will grow worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived.
But you remain in the things which you have learned and have been assured of, knowing from whom you have learned them.
From infancy, you have known the holy Scriptures which are able to make you wise for salvation through faith, which is in Christ Jesus.
Every Scripture is God-breathed and profitable for teaching, for reproof, for correction, and for instruction in righteousness,
that the man of God may be complete, thoroughly equipped for every good work.
Moreover, brothers, we make known to you the grace of God which has been given in the assemblies of Macedonia;
how that in much proof of affliction the abundance of their joy and their deep poverty abounded to the riches of their liberality.
For according to their power, I testify, yes and beyond their power, they gave of their own accord,
begging us with much entreaty to receive this grace and the fellowship in the service to the saints.
This was not as we had hoped, but first they gave their own selves to the Lord, and to us through the will of God.
So we urged Titus, that as he made a beginning before, so he would also complete in you this grace.
But as you abound in everything, in faith, utterance, knowledge, all earnestness, and in your love to us, see that you also abound in this grace.
I speak not by way of commandment, but as proving through the earnestness of others the sincerity also of your love.
For you know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that, though he was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that you through his poverty might become rich.
I give a judgment in this: for this is expedient for you, who were the first to start a year ago, not only to do, but also to be willing.
But now complete the doing also, that as there was the readiness to be willing, so there may be the completion also out of your ability.
For if the readiness is there, it is acceptable according to what you have, not according to what you don't have.
For this is not that others may be eased and you distressed,
but for equality. Your abundance at this present time supplies their lack, that their abundance also may become a supply for your lack; that there may be equality.
As it is written, 'He who gathered much had nothing left over, and he who gathered little had no lack.'
But thanks be to God, who puts the same earnest care for you into the heart of Titus.
For he indeed accepted our exhortation, but being himself very earnest, he went out to you of his own accord.
We have sent together with him the brother whose praise in the Good News is known through all the assemblies.
Not only so, but who was also appointed by the assemblies to travel with us in this grace, which is served by us to the glory of the Lord himself, and to show our readiness.
We are avoiding this, that any man should blame us concerning this abundance which is administered by us.
Having regard for honorable things, not only in the sight of the Lord, but also in the sight of men.
We have sent with them our brother, whom we have many times proved earnest in many things, but now much more earnest, by reason of the great confidence which he has in you.
As for Titus, he is my partner and fellow worker for you. As for our brothers, they are the apostles of the assemblies, the glory of Christ.
Therefore show the proof of your love to them in front of the assemblies, and of our boasting on your behalf.
Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus through the will of God, and Timothy our brother,
to the saints and faithful brothers in Christ at Colossae: Grace to you and peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.
We give thanks to God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, praying always for you,
having heard of your faith in Christ Jesus, and of the love which you have toward all the saints,
because of the hope which is laid up for you in the heavens, of which you heard before in the word of the truth of the Good News,
which has come to you; even as it is in all the world and is bearing fruit and growing, as it does in you also, since the day you heard and knew the grace of God in truth;
even as you learned of Epaphras our beloved fellow servant, who is a faithful servant of Christ on our behalf,
who also declared to us your love in the Spirit.
For this cause, we also, since the day we heard this, don't cease praying and making requests for you, that you may be filled with the knowledge of his will in all spiritual wisdom and understanding,
that you may walk worthily of the Lord, to please him in all respects, bearing fruit in every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God;
strengthened with all power, according to the might of his glory, for all endurance and perseverance with joy;
giving thanks to the Father, who made us fit to be partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light;
who delivered us out of the power of darkness, and translated us into the Kingdom of the Son of his love;
in whom we have our redemption, the forgiveness of our sins;
who is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of all creation.
For by him all things were created, in the heavens and on the earth, things visible and things invisible, whether thrones or dominions or principalities or powers; all things have been created through him, and for him.
He is before all things, and in him all things are held together.
He is the head of the body, the assembly, who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead; that in all things he might have the preeminence.
For all the fullness was pleased to dwell in him;
and through him to reconcile all things to himself, by him, whether things on the earth, or things in the heavens, having made peace through the blood of his cross.
You, being in past times alienated and enemies in your mind in your evil works,
yet now he has reconciled in the body of his flesh through death, to present you holy and without blemish and blameless before him,
if it is so that you continue in the faith, grounded and steadfast, and not moved away from the hope of the Good News which you heard, which is being proclaimed in all creation under heaven; of which I, Paul, was made a servant.
Now I rejoice in my sufferings for your sake, and fill up on my part that which is lacking of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh for his body's sake, which is the assembly;
of which I was made a servant, according to the stewardship of God which was given me toward you, to fulfill the word of God,
the mystery which has been hidden for ages and generations. But now it has been revealed to his saints,
to whom God was pleased to make known what are the riches of the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles, which is Christ in you, the hope of glory;
whom we proclaim, admonishing every man and teaching every man in all wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus;
for which I also labor, striving according to his working, which works in me mightily.
As he passed by, he saw a man blind from birth.
His disciples asked him, 'Rabbi, who sinned, this man or his parents, that he was born blind?'
Jesus answered, 'Neither did this man sin, nor his parents; but, that the works of God might be revealed in him.
I must work the works of him who sent me, while it is day. The night is coming, when no one can work.
While I am in the world, I am the light of the world.'
When he had said this, he spat on the ground, made mud with the saliva, anointed the blind man's eyes with the mud,
and said to him, 'Go, wash in the pool of Siloam' (which means 'Sent'). So he went away, washed, and came back seeing.
The neighbors therefore, and those who saw that he was blind before, said, 'Isn't this he who sat and begged?'
Others were saying, 'It is he.' Still others were saying, 'He looks like him.' He said, 'I am he.'
They therefore were asking him, 'How were your eyes opened?'
He answered, 'A man called Jesus made mud, anointed my eyes, and said to me, 'Go to the pool of Siloam, and wash.' So I went away and washed, and I received sight.'
Then they asked him, 'Where is he?' He said, 'I don't know.'
They brought him who had been blind to the Pharisees.
It was a Sabbath when Jesus made the mud and opened his eyes.
Again therefore the Pharisees also asked him how he received his sight. He said to them, 'He put mud on my eyes, I washed, and I see.'
Some therefore of the Pharisees said, 'This man is not from God, because he doesn't keep the Sabbath.' Others said, 'How can a man who is a sinner do such signs?' There was division among them.
Therefore they asked the blind man again, 'What do you say about him, because he opened your eyes?' He said, 'He is a prophet.'
The Jews therefore did not believe concerning him, that he had been blind, and had received his sight, until they called the parents of him who had received his sight,
and asked them, 'Is this your son, who you say was born blind? How then does he now see?'
His parents answered them, 'We know that this is our son, and that he was born blind;
but how he now sees, we don't know; or who opened his eyes, we don't know. He is of age. Ask him. He will speak for himself.'
His parents said these things because they feared the Jews; for the Jews had already agreed that if any man would confess him as Christ, he would be put out of the synagogue.
Therefore his parents said, 'He is of age. Ask him.'
So they called the man who was blind a second time, and said to him, 'Give glory to God. We know that this man is a sinner.'
He therefore answered, 'I don't know if he is a sinner. One thing I do know: that though I was blind, now I see.'
They said to him again, 'What did he do to you? How did he open your eyes?'
He answered them, 'I told you already, and you didn't listen. Why do you want to hear it again? You don't also want to become his disciples, do you?'
They insulted him and said, 'You are his disciple, but we are disciples of Moses.
We know that God has spoken to Moses. But as for this man, we don't know where he comes from.'
The man answered them, 'How amazing! You don't know where he comes from, yet he opened my eyes.
We know that God doesn't listen to sinners, but if anyone is a worshipper of God, and does his will, he listens to him.
Since the world began it has never been heard of that anyone opened the eyes of someone born blind.
If this man were not from God, he could do nothing.'
They answered him, 'You were altogether born in sins, and do you teach us?' They threw him out.
Jesus heard that they had thrown him out, and finding him, he said, 'Do you believe in the Son of God?'
He answered, 'Who is he, Lord, that I may believe in him?'
Jesus said to him, 'You have both seen him, and it is he who speaks with you.'
He said, 'Lord, I believe!' and he worshiped him.
Jesus said, 'I came into this world for judgment, that those who don't see may see; and that those who see may become blind.'
Those of the Pharisees who were with him heard these things, and said to him, 'Are we also blind?'
Jesus said to them, 'If you were blind, you would have no sin; but now you say, 'We see.' Therefore your sin remains.
'Brothers and fathers, listen to the defense which I now make to you.'
When they heard that he spoke to them in the Hebrew language, they were even more quiet. He said,
'I am indeed a Jew, born in Tarsus of Cilicia, but brought up in this city at the feet of Gamaliel, instructed according to the strict manner of the law of our fathers, being zealous for God, even as you all are this day.
I persecuted this Way to the death, binding and delivering into prisons both men and women.
As also the high priest and all the council of the elders testify, from whom also I received letters to the brothers, and traveled to Damascus to bring them also who were there to Jerusalem in bonds to be punished.
It happened that, as I made my journey, and came close to Damascus, about noon, suddenly there shone from the sky a great light around me.
I fell to the ground, and heard a voice saying to me, 'Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me?'
I answered, 'Who are you, Lord?' He said to me, 'I am Jesus of Nazareth, whom you persecute.'
'Those who were with me indeed saw the light and were afraid, but they didn't understand the voice of him who spoke to me.
I said, 'What shall I do, Lord?' The Lord said to me, 'Arise, and go into Damascus. There you will be told about all things which are appointed for you to do.'
When I couldn't see for the glory of that light, being led by the hand of those who were with me, I came into Damascus.
One Ananias, a devout man according to the law, well reported of by all the Jews who lived in Damascus,
came to me, and standing by me said to me, 'Brother Saul, receive your sight!' In that very hour I looked up at him.
He said, 'The God of our fathers has appointed you to know his will, and to see the Righteous One, and to hear a voice from his mouth.
For you will be a witness for him to all men of what you have seen and heard.
Now why do you wait? Arise, be baptized, and wash away your sins, calling on the name of the Lord.'
'It happened that, when I had returned to Jerusalem, and while I prayed in the temple, I fell into a trance,
and saw him saying to me, 'Hurry and get out of Jerusalem quickly, because they will not receive testimony concerning me from you.'
I said, 'Lord, they themselves know that I imprisoned and beat in every synagogue those who believed in you.
When the blood of Stephen, your witness, was shed, I also was standing by, and consenting to his death, and guarding the cloaks of those who killed him.'
'He said to me, 'Depart, for I will send you out far from here to the Gentiles.''
They listened to him until he said that; then they lifted up their voice, and said, 'Rid the earth of this fellow, for he isn't fit to live!'
As they cried out, and threw off their cloaks, and threw dust into the air,
the commanding officer commanded him to be brought into the barracks, ordering him to be examined by scourging, that he might know for what crime they shouted against him like that.
When they had tied him up with thongs, Paul asked the centurion who stood by, 'Is it lawful for you to scourge a man who is a Roman, and not found guilty?'
When the centurion heard it, he went to the commanding officer and told him, 'Watch what you are about to do, for this man is a Roman!'
The commanding officer came and asked him, 'Tell me, are you a Roman?' He said, 'Yes.'
The commanding officer answered, 'I bought my citizenship for a great price.' Paul said, 'But I was born a Roman.'
Immediately those who were about to examine him departed from him, and the commanding officer also was afraid when he realized that he was a Roman, because he had bound him.
But on the next day, desiring to know the truth about why he was accused by the Jews, he freed him from the bonds, and commanded the chief priests and all the council to come together, and brought Paul down and set him before them.
Then what advantage does the Jew have? Or what is the profit of circumcision?
Much in every way! Because first of all, they were entrusted with the oracles of God.
For what if some were without faith? Will their lack of faith nullify the faithfulness of God?
May it never be! Yes, let God be found true, but every man a liar. As it is written, 'That you might be justified in your words, and might prevail when you come into judgment.'
But if our unrighteousness commends the righteousness of God, what will we say? Is God unrighteous who inflicts wrath? I speak like men do.
May it never be! For then how will God judge the world?
For if the truth of God through my lie abounded to his glory, why am I also still judged as a sinner?
Why not (as we are slanderously reported, and as some affirm that we say), 'Let us do evil, that good may come?' Those who say so are justly condemned.
What then? Are we better than they? No, in no way. For we previously warned both Jews and Greeks, that they are all under sin.
As it is written, 'There is no one righteous; no, not one.
There is no one who understands. There is no one who seeks after God.
They have all turned aside. They have together become unprofitable. There is no one who does good, no, not, so much as one.'
'Their throat is an open tomb. With their tongues they have used deceit.'
'Whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness.'
'Their feet are swift to shed blood.
Destruction and misery are in their ways.
The way of peace, they haven't known.'
'There is no fear of God before their eyes.'
Now we know that whatever things the law says, it speaks to those who are under the law, that every mouth may be closed, and all the world may be brought under the judgment of God.
Because by the works of the law, no flesh will be justified in his sight. For through the law comes the knowledge of sin.
But now apart from the law, a righteousness of God has been revealed, being testified by the law and the prophets;
even the righteousness of God through faith in Jesus Christ to all and on all those who believe. For there is no distinction,
for all have sinned, and fall short of the glory of God;
being justified freely by his grace through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus;
whom God set forth to be an atoning sacrifice, through faith in his blood, for a demonstration of his righteousness through the passing over of prior sins, in God's forbearance;
to demonstrate his righteousness at this present time; that he might himself be just, and the justifier of him who has faith in Jesus.
Where then is the boasting? It is excluded. By what manner of law? Of works? No, but by a law of faith.
We maintain therefore that a man is justified by faith apart from the works of the law.
Or is God the God of Jews only? Isn't he the God of Gentiles also? Yes, of Gentiles also,
since indeed there is one God who will justify the circumcised by faith, and the uncircumcised through faith.
Do we then nullify the law through faith? May it never be! No, we establish the law.
The book of the genealogy of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of Abraham.
Abraham became the father of Isaac. Isaac became the father of Jacob. Jacob became the father of Judah and his brothers.
Judah became the father of Perez and Zerah by Tamar. Perez became the father of Hezron. Hezron became the father of Ram.
Ram became the father of Amminadab. Amminadab became the father of Nahshon. Nahshon became the father of Salmon.
Salmon became the father of Boaz by Rahab. Boaz became the father of Obed by Ruth. Obed became the father of Jesse.
Jesse became the father of David the king. David became the father of Solomon by her who had been the wife of Uriah.
Solomon became the father of Rehoboam. Rehoboam became the father of Abijah. Abijah became the father of Asa.
Asa became the father of Jehoshaphat. Jehoshaphat became the father of Joram. Joram became the father of Uzziah.
Uzziah became the father of Jotham. Jotham became the father of Ahaz. Ahaz became the father of Hezekiah.
Hezekiah became the father of Manasseh. Manasseh became the father of Amon. Amon became the father of Josiah.
Josiah became the father of Jechoniah and his brothers, at the time of the exile to Babylon.
After the exile to Babylon, Jechoniah became the father of Shealtiel. Shealtiel became the father of Zerubbabel.
Zerubbabel became the father of Abiud. Abiud became the father of Eliakim. Eliakim became the father of Azor.
Azor became the father of Sadoc. Sadoc became the father of Achim. Achim became the father of Eliud.
Eliud became the father of Eleazar. Eleazar became the father of Matthan. Matthan became the father of Jacob.
Jacob became the father of Joseph, the husband of Mary, from whom was born Jesus, who is called Christ.
So all the generations from Abraham to David are fourteen generations; from David to the exile to Babylon fourteen generations; and from the carrying away to Babylon to the Christ, fourteen generations.
Now the birth of Jesus Christ was like this; for after his mother, Mary, was engaged to Joseph, before they came together, she was found pregnant by the Holy Spirit.
Joseph, her husband, being a righteous man, and not willing to make her a public example, intended to put her away secretly.
But when he thought about these things, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream, saying, 'Joseph, son of David, don't be afraid to take to yourself Mary, your wife, for that which is conceived in her is of the Holy Spirit.
She shall bring forth a son. You shall call his name Jesus, for it is he who shall save his people from their sins.'
Now all this has happened, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Lord through the prophet, saying,
'Behold, the virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son. They shall call his name Immanuel;' which is, being interpreted, 'God with us.'
Joseph arose from his sleep, and did as the angel of the Lord commanded him, and took his wife to himself;
and didn't know her sexually until she had brought forth her firstborn son. He named him Jesus.
Now we who are strong ought to bear the weaknesses of the weak, and not to please ourselves.
Let each one of us please his neighbor for that which is good, to be building him up.
For even Christ didn't please himself. But, as it is written, 'The reproaches of those who reproached you fell on me.'
For whatever things were written before were written for our learning, that through patience and through encouragement of the Scriptures we might have hope.
Now the God of patience and of encouragement grant you to be of the same mind one with another according to Christ Jesus,
that with one accord you may with one mouth glorify the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Therefore accept one another, even as Christ also accepted you, to the glory of God.
Now I say that Christ has been made a servant of the circumcision for the truth of God, that he might confirm the promises given to the fathers,
and that the Gentiles might glorify God for his mercy. As it is written, 'Therefore will I give praise to you among the Gentiles, and sing to your name.'
Again he says, 'Rejoice, you Gentiles, with his people.'
Again, 'Praise the Lord, all you Gentiles! Let all the peoples praise him.'
Again, Isaiah says, 'There will be the root of Jesse, he who arises to rule over the Gentiles; in him the Gentiles will hope.'
Now may the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, that you may abound in hope, in the power of the Holy Spirit.
I myself am also persuaded about you, my brothers, that you yourselves are full of goodness, filled with all knowledge, able also to admonish others.
But I write the more boldly to you in part, as reminding you, because of the grace that was given to me by God,
that I should be a servant of Christ Jesus to the Gentiles, serving as a priest the Good News of God, that the offering up of the Gentiles might be made acceptable, sanctified by the Holy Spirit.
I have therefore my boasting in Christ Jesus in things pertaining to God.
For I will not dare to speak of any things except those which Christ worked through me, for the obedience of the Gentiles, by word and deed,
in the power of signs and wonders, in the power of God's Spirit; so that from Jerusalem, and around as far as to Illyricum, I have fully preached the Good News of Christ;
yes, making it my aim to preach the Good News, not where Christ was already named, that I might not build on another's foundation.
But, as it is written, 'They will see, to whom no news of him came. They who haven't heard will understand.'
Therefore also I was hindered these many times from coming to you,
but now, no longer having any place in these regions, and having these many years a longing to come to you,
whenever I journey to Spain, I will come to you. For I hope to see you on my journey, and to be helped on my way there by you, if first I may enjoy your company for a while.
But now, I say, I am going to Jerusalem, serving the saints.
For it has been the good pleasure of Macedonia and Achaia to make a certain contribution for the poor among the saints who are at Jerusalem.
Yes, it has been their good pleasure, and they are their debtors. For if the Gentiles have been made partakers of their spiritual things, they owe it to them also to serve them in fleshly things.
When therefore I have accomplished this, and have sealed to them this fruit, I will go on by way of you to Spain.
I know that, when I come to you, I will come in the fullness of the blessing of the Good News of Christ.
Now I beg you, brothers, by our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the love of the Spirit, that you strive together with me in your prayers to God for me,
that I may be delivered from those who are disobedient in Judea, and that my service which I have for Jerusalem may be acceptable to the saints;
that I may come to you in joy through the will of God, and together with you, find rest.
Now the God of peace be with you all. Amen.
After six days, Jesus took with him Peter, James, and John his brother, and brought them up into a high mountain by themselves.
He was transfigured before them. His face shone like the sun, and his garments became as white as the light.
Behold, Moses and Elijah appeared to them talking with him.
Peter answered, and said to Jesus, 'Lord, it is good for us to be here. If you want, let's make three tents here: one for you, one for Moses, and one for Elijah.'
While he was still speaking, behold, a bright cloud overshadowed them. Behold, a voice came out of the cloud, saying, 'This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. Listen to him.'
When the disciples heard it, they fell on their faces, and were very afraid.
Jesus came and touched them and said, 'Get up, and don't be afraid.'
Lifting up their eyes, they saw no one, except Jesus alone.
As they were coming down from the mountain, Jesus commanded them, saying, 'Don't tell anyone what you saw, until the Son of Man has risen from the dead.'
His disciples asked him, saying, 'Then why do the scribes say that Elijah must come first?'
Jesus answered them, 'Elijah indeed comes first, and will restore all things,
but I tell you that Elijah has come already, and they didn't recognize him, but did to him whatever they wanted to. Even so the Son of Man will also suffer by them.'
Then the disciples understood that he spoke to them of John the Baptizer.
When they came to the multitude, a man came to him, kneeling down to him, saying,
'Lord, have mercy on my son, for he is epileptic, and suffers grievously; for he often falls into the fire, and often into the water.
So I brought him to your disciples, and they could not cure him.'
Jesus answered, 'Faithless and perverse generation! How long will I be with you? How long will I bear with you? Bring him here to me.'
Jesus rebuked him, the demon went out of him, and the boy was cured from that hour.
Then the disciples came to Jesus privately, and said, 'Why weren't we able to cast it out?'
He said to them, 'Because of your unbelief. For most certainly I tell you, if you have faith as a grain of mustard seed, you will tell this mountain, 'Move from here to there,' and it will move; and nothing will be impossible for you.
But this kind doesn't go out except by prayer and fasting.'
While they were staying in Galilee, Jesus said to them, 'The Son of Man is about to be delivered up into the hands of men,
and they will kill him, and the third day he will be raised up.' They were exceedingly sorry.
When they had come to Capernaum, those who collected the didrachma coins came to Peter, and said, 'Doesn't your teacher pay the didrachma?'
He said, 'Yes.' When he came into the house, Jesus anticipated him, saying, 'What do you think, Simon? From whom do the kings of the earth receive toll or tribute? From their children, or from strangers?'
Peter said to him, 'From strangers.' Jesus said to him, 'Therefore the children are exempt.
But, lest we cause them to stumble, go to the sea, cast a hook, and take up the first fish that comes up. When you have opened its mouth, you will find a stater coin. Take that, and give it to them for me and you.'
This is the Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave him to show to his servants the things which must happen soon, which he sent and made known by his angel to his servant, John,
who testified to God's word, and of the testimony of Jesus Christ, about everything that he saw.
Blessed is he who reads and those who hear the words of the prophecy, and keep the things that are written in it, for the time is at hand.
John, to the seven assemblies that are in Asia: Grace to you and peace, from God, who is and who was and who is to come; and from the seven Spirits who are before his throne;
and from Jesus Christ, the faithful witness, the firstborn of the dead, and the ruler of the kings of the earth. To him who loves us, and washed us from our sins by his blood;
and he made us to be a Kingdom, priests to his God and Father; to him be the glory and the dominion forever and ever. Amen.
Behold, he is coming with the clouds, and every eye will see him, including those who pierced him. All the tribes of the earth will mourn over him. Even so, Amen.
'I am the Alpha and the Omega, 'who is and who was and who is to come, the Almighty.'
I John, your brother and partner with you in oppression, Kingdom, and perseverance in Christ Jesus, was on the isle that is called Patmos because of God's Word and the testimony of Jesus Christ.
I was in the Spirit on the Lord's day, and I heard behind me a loud voice, like a trumpet
saying, ': to Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamum, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia, and to Laodicea.'
I turned to see the voice that spoke with me. Having turned, I saw seven golden lampstands.
And among the lampstands was one like a son of man, clothed with a robe reaching down to his feet, and with a golden sash around his chest.
His head and his hair were white as white wool, like snow. His eyes were like a flame of fire.
His feet were like burnished brass, as if it had been refined in a furnace. His voice was like the voice of many waters.
He had seven stars in his right hand. Out of his mouth proceeded a sharp two-edged sword. His face was like the sun shining at its brightest.
When I saw him, I fell at his feet like a dead man. He laid his right hand on me, saying, 'Don't be afraid. I am the first and the last,
and the Living one. I was dead, and behold, I am alive forevermore. Amen. I have the keys of Death and of Hades.
Write therefore the things which you have seen, and the things which are, and the things which will happen hereafter;
the mystery of the seven stars which you saw in my right hand, and the seven golden lampstands. The seven stars are the angels of the seven assemblies. The seven lampstands are seven assemblies.
After these things Paul departed from Athens, and came to Corinth.
He found a certain Jew named Aquila, a man of Pontus by race, who had recently come from Italy, with his wife Priscilla, because Claudius had commanded all the Jews to depart from Rome. He came to them,
and because he practiced the same trade, he lived with them and worked, for by trade they were tent makers.
He reasoned in the synagogue every Sabbath, and persuaded Jews and Greeks.
But when Silas and Timothy came down from Macedonia, Paul was compelled by the Spirit, testifying to the Jews that Jesus was the Christ.
When they opposed him and blasphemed, he shook out his clothing and said to them, 'Your blood be on your own heads! I am clean. From now on, I will go to the Gentiles!'
He departed there, and went into the house of a certain man named Justus, one who worshiped God, whose house was next door to the synagogue.
Crispus, the ruler of the synagogue, believed in the Lord with all his house. Many of the Corinthians, when they heard, believed and were baptized.
The Lord said to Paul in the night by a vision, 'Don't be afraid, but speak and don't be silent;
for I am with you, and no one will attack you to harm you, for I have many people in this city.'
He lived there a year and six months, teaching the word of God among them.
But when Gallio was proconsul of Achaia, the Jews with one accord rose up against Paul and brought him before the judgment seat,
saying, 'This man persuades men to worship God contrary to the law.'
But when Paul was about to open his mouth, Gallio said to the Jews, 'If indeed it were a matter of wrong or of wicked crime, you Jews, it would be reasonable that I should bear with you;
but if they are questions about words and names and your own law, look to it yourselves. For I don't want to be a judge of these matters.'
He drove them from the judgment seat.
Then all the Greeks laid hold on Sosthenes, the ruler of the synagogue, and beat him before the judgment seat. Gallio didn't care about any of these things.
Paul, having stayed after this many more days, took his leave of the brothers, and sailed from there for Syria, together with Priscilla and Aquila. He shaved his head in Cenchreae, for he had a vow.
He came to Ephesus, and he left them there; but he himself entered into the synagogue, and reasoned with the Jews.
When they asked him to stay with them a longer time, he declined;
but taking his leave of them, and saying, 'I must by all means keep this coming feast in Jerusalem, but I will return again to you if God wills,' he set sail from Ephesus.
When he had landed at Caesarea, he went up and greeted the assembly, and went down to Antioch.
Having spent some time there, he departed, and went through the region of Galatia, and Phrygia, in order, establishing all the disciples.
Now a certain Jew named Apollos, an Alexandrian by race, an eloquent man, came to Ephesus. He was mighty in the Scriptures.
This man had been instructed in the way of the Lord; and being fervent in spirit, he spoke and taught accurately the things concerning Jesus, although he knew only the baptism of John.
He began to speak boldly in the synagogue. But when Priscilla and Aquila heard him, they took him aside, and explained to him the way of God more accurately.
When he had determined to pass over into Achaia, the brothers encouraged him, and wrote to the disciples to receive him. When he had come, he greatly helped those who had believed through grace;
for he powerfully refuted the Jews, publicly showing by the Scriptures that Jesus was the Christ.
It happened on one of those days, as he was teaching the people in the temple and preaching the Good News, that the priests and scribes came to him with the elders.
They asked him, 'Tell us: by what authority do you do these things? Or who is giving you this authority?'
He answered them, 'I also will ask you one question. Tell me:
the baptism of John, was it from heaven, or from men?'
They reasoned with themselves, saying, 'If we say, 'From heaven,' he will say, 'Why didn't you believe him?'
But if we say, 'From men,' all the people will stone us, for they are persuaded that John was a prophet.'
They answered that they didn't know where it was from.
Jesus said to them, 'Neither will I tell you by what authority I do these things.'
He began to tell the people this parable. 'A man planted a vineyard, and rented it out to some farmers, and went into another country for a long time.
At the proper season, he sent a servant to the farmers to collect his share of the fruit of the vineyard. But the farmers beat him, and sent him away empty.
He sent yet another servant, and they also beat him, and treated him shamefully, and sent him away empty.
He sent yet a third, and they also wounded him, and threw him out.
The lord of the vineyard said, 'What shall I do? I will send my beloved son. It may be that seeing him, they will respect him.'
'But when the farmers saw him, they reasoned among themselves, saying, 'This is the heir. Come, let's kill him, that the inheritance may be ours.'
They threw him out of the vineyard, and killed him. What therefore will the lord of the vineyard do to them?
He will come and destroy these farmers, and will give the vineyard to others.' When they heard it, they said, 'May it never be!'
But he looked at them, and said, 'Then what is this that is written, 'The stone which the builders rejected, the same was made the chief cornerstone?'
Everyone who falls on that stone will be broken to pieces, but it will crush whomever it falls on to dust.'
The chief priests and the scribes sought to lay hands on him that very hour, but they feared the people--for they knew he had spoken this parable against them.
They watched him, and sent out spies, who pretended to be righteous, that they might trap him in something he said, so as to deliver him up to the power and authority of the governor.
They asked him, 'Teacher, we know that you say and teach what is right, and aren't partial to anyone, but truly teach the way of God.
Is it lawful for us to pay taxes to Caesar, or not?'
But he perceived their craftiness, and said to them, 'Why do you test me?
Show me a denarius. Whose image and inscription are on it?' They answered, 'Caesar's.'
He said to them, 'Then give to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's.'
They weren't able to trap him in his words before the people. They marveled at his answer, and were silent.
Some of the Sadducees came to him, those who deny that there is a resurrection.
They asked him, 'Teacher, Moses wrote to us that if a man's brother dies having a wife, and he is childless, his brother should take the wife, and raise up children for his brother.
There were therefore seven brothers. The first took a wife, and died childless.
The second took her as wife, and he died childless.
The third took her, and likewise the seven all left no children, and died.
Afterward the woman also died.
Therefore in the resurrection whose wife of them will she be? For the seven had her as a wife.'
Jesus said to them, 'The children of this age marry, and are given in marriage.
But those who are considered worthy to attain to that age and the resurrection from the dead, neither marry, nor are given in marriage.
For they can't die any more, for they are like the angels, and are children of God, being children of the resurrection.
But that the dead are raised, even Moses showed at the bush, when he called the Lord 'The God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.'
Now he is not the God of the dead, but of the living, for all are alive to him.'
Some of the scribes answered, 'Teacher, you speak well.'
They didn't dare to ask him any more questions.
He said to them, 'Why do they say that the Christ is David's son?
David himself says in the book of Psalms, 'The Lord said to my Lord, 'Sit at my right hand,
until I make your enemies the footstool of your feet.''
'David therefore calls him Lord, so how is he his son?'
In the hearing of all the people, he said to his disciples,
'Beware of the scribes, who like to walk in long robes, and love greetings in the marketplaces, the best seats in the synagogues, and the best places at feasts;
who devour widows' houses, and for a pretense make long prayers: these will receive greater condemnation.'
Therefore seeing we have this ministry, even as we obtained mercy, we don't faint.
But we have renounced the hidden things of shame, not walking in craftiness, nor handling the word of God deceitfully; but by the manifestation of the truth commending ourselves to every man's conscience in the sight of God.
Even if our Good News is veiled, it is veiled in those who perish;
in whom the god of this world has blinded the minds of the unbelieving, that the light of the Good News of the glory of Christ, who is the image of God, should not dawn on them.
For we don't preach ourselves, but Christ Jesus as Lord, and ourselves as your servants for Jesus' sake;
seeing it is God who said, 'Light will shine out of darkness,' who has shone in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ.
But we have this treasure in clay vessels, that the exceeding greatness of the power may be of God, and not from ourselves.
We are pressed on every side, yet not crushed; perplexed, yet not to despair;
pursued, yet not forsaken; struck down, yet not destroyed;
always carrying in the body the putting to death of the Lord Jesus, that the life of Jesus may also be revealed in our body.
For we who live are always delivered to death for Jesus' sake, that the life also of Jesus may be revealed in our mortal flesh.
So then death works in us, but life in you.
But having the same spirit of faith, according to that which is written, 'I believed, and therefore I spoke.' We also believe, and therefore also we speak;
knowing that he who raised the Lord Jesus will raise us also with Jesus, and will present us with you.
For all things are for your sakes, that the grace, being multiplied through the many, may cause the thanksgiving to abound to the glory of God.
Therefore we don't faint, but though our outward man is decaying, yet our inward man is renewed day by day.
For our light affliction, which is for the moment, works for us more and more exceedingly an eternal weight of glory;
while we don't look at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen. For the things which are seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal.
Brothers, even if a man is caught in some fault, you who are spiritual must restore such a one in a spirit of gentleness; looking to yourself so that you also aren't tempted.
Bear one another's burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ.
For if a man thinks himself to be something when he is nothing, he deceives himself.
But let each man test his own work, and then he will take pride in himself and not in his neighbor.
For each man will bear his own burden.
But let him who is taught in the word share all good things with him who teaches.
Don't be deceived. God is not mocked, for whatever a man sows, that he will also reap.
For he who sows to his own flesh will from the flesh reap corruption. But he who sows to the Spirit will from the Spirit reap eternal life.
Let us not be weary in doing good, for we will reap in due season, if we don't give up.
So then, as we have opportunity, let's do what is good toward all men, and especially toward those who are of the household of the faith.
See with what large letters I write to you with my own hand.
As many as desire to look good in the flesh, they compel you to be circumcised; only that they may not be persecuted for the cross of Christ.
For even they who receive circumcision don't keep the law themselves, but they desire to have you circumcised, that they may boast in your flesh.
But far be it from me to boast, except in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, through which the world has been crucified to me, and I to the world.
For in Christ Jesus neither is circumcision anything, nor uncircumcision, but a new creation.
As many as walk by this rule, peace and mercy be on them, and on God's Israel.
From now on, let no one cause me any trouble, for I bear the marks of the Lord Jesus branded on my body.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit, brothers. Amen.
I exhort the elders among you, as a fellow elder, and a witness of the sufferings of Christ, and who will also share in the glory that will be revealed.
Shepherd the flock of God which is among you, exercising the oversight, not under compulsion, but voluntarily, not for dishonest gain, but willingly;
neither as lording it over those entrusted to you, but making yourselves examples to the flock.
When the chief Shepherd is revealed, you will receive the crown of glory that doesn't fade away.
Likewise, you younger ones, be subject to the elder. Yes, all of you gird yourselves with humility, to subject yourselves to one another; for 'God resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble.'
Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time;
casting all your worries on him, because he cares for you.
Be sober and self-controlled. Be watchful. Your adversary the devil, walks around like a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour.
Withstand him steadfast in your faith, knowing that your brothers who are in the world are undergoing the same sufferings.
But may the God of all grace, who called you to his eternal glory by Christ Jesus, after you have suffered a little while, perfect, establish, strengthen, and settle you.
To him be the glory and the power forever and ever. Amen.
Through Silvanus, our faithful brother, as I consider him, I have written to you briefly, exhorting, and testifying that this is the true grace of God in which you stand.
She who is in Babylon, chosen together with you, greets you; and so does Mark, my son.
Greet one another with a kiss of love. Peace be to you all who are in Christ Jesus. Amen.
After these things, there was a feast of the Jews, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.
Now in Jerusalem by the sheep gate, there is a pool, which is called in Hebrew, 'Bethesda,' having five porches.
In these lay a great multitude of those who were sick, blind, lame, or paralyzed, waiting for the moving of the water;
for an angel of the Lord went down at certain times into the pool, and stirred up the water. Whoever stepped in first after the stirring of the water was made whole of whatever disease he had.
A certain man was there, who had been sick for thirty-eight years.
When Jesus saw him lying there, and knew that he had been sick for a long time, he asked him, 'Do you want to be made well?'
The sick man answered him, 'Sir, I have no one to put me into the pool when the water is stirred up, but while I'm coming, another steps down before me.'
Jesus said to him, 'Arise, take up your mat, and walk.'
Immediately, the man was made well, and took up his mat and walked. Now it was the Sabbath on that day.
So the Jews said to him who was cured, 'It is the Sabbath. It is not lawful for you to carry the mat.'
He answered them, 'He who made me well, the same said to me, 'Take up your mat, and walk.''
Then they asked him, 'Who is the man who said to you, 'Take up your mat, and walk'?'
But he who was healed didn't know who it was, for Jesus had withdrawn, a crowd being in the place.
Afterward Jesus found him in the temple, and said to him, 'Behold, you are made well. Sin no more, so that nothing worse happens to you.'
The man went away, and told the Jews that it was Jesus who had made him well.
For this cause the Jews persecuted Jesus, and sought to kill him, because he did these things on the Sabbath.
But Jesus answered them, 'My Father is still working, so I am working, too.'
For this cause therefore the Jews sought all the more to kill him, because he not only broke the Sabbath, but also called God his own Father, making himself equal with God.
Jesus therefore answered them, 'Most certainly, I tell you, the Son can do nothing of himself, but what he sees the Father doing. For whatever things he does, these the Son also does likewise.
For the Father has affection for the Son, and shows him all things that he himself does. He will show him greater works than these, that you may marvel.
For as the Father raises the dead and gives them life, even so the Son also gives life to whom he desires.
For the Father judges no one, but he has given all judgment to the Son,
that all may honor the Son, even as they honor the Father. He who doesn't honor the Son doesn't honor the Father who sent him.
'Most certainly I tell you, he who hears my word, and believes him who sent me, has eternal life, and doesn't come into judgment, but has passed out of death into life.
Most certainly, I tell you, the hour comes, and now is, when the dead will hear the Son of God's voice; and those who hear will live.
For as the Father has life in himself, even so he gave to the Son also to have life in himself.
He also gave him authority to execute judgment, because he is a son of man.
Don't marvel at this, for the hour comes, in which all that are in the tombs will hear his voice,
and will come out; those who have done good, to the resurrection of life; and those who have done evil, to the resurrection of judgment.
I can of myself do nothing. As I hear, I judge, and my judgment is righteous; because I don't seek my own will, but the will of my Father who sent me.
'If I testify about myself, my witness is not valid.
It is another who testifies about me. I know that the testimony which he testifies about me is true.
You have sent to John, and he has testified to the truth.
But the testimony which I receive is not from man. However, I say these things that you may be saved.
He was the burning and shining lamp, and you were willing to rejoice for a while in his light.
But the testimony which I have is greater than that of John, for the works which the Father gave me to accomplish, the very works that I do, testify about me, that the Father has sent me.
The Father himself, who sent me, has testified about me. You have neither heard his voice at any time, nor seen his form.
You don't have his word living in you; because you don't believe him whom he sent.
'You search the Scriptures, because you think that in them you have eternal life; and these are they which testify about me.
Yet you will not come to me, that you may have life.
I don't receive glory from men.
But I know you, that you don't have God's love in yourselves.
I have come in my Father's name, and you don't receive me. If another comes in his own name, you will receive him.
How can you believe, who receive glory from one another, and you don't seek the glory that comes from the only God?
'Don't think that I will accuse you to the Father. There is one who accuses you, even Moses, on whom you have set your hope.
For if you believed Moses, you would believe me; for he wrote about me.
But if you don't believe his writings, how will you believe my words?'
This is now, beloved, the second letter that I have written to you; and in both of them I stir up your sincere mind by reminding you;
that you should remember the words which were spoken before by the holy prophets, and the commandments of us, the apostles of the Lord and Savior:
knowing this first, that in the last days mockers will come, walking after their own lusts,
and saying, 'Where is the promise of his coming? For, from the day that the fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the beginning of the creation.'
For this they willfully forget, that there were heavens from of old, and an earth formed out of water and amid water, by the word of God;
by which means the world that then was, being overflowed with water, perished.
But the heavens that now are, and the earth, by the same word have been stored up for fire, being reserved against the day of judgment and destruction of ungodly men.
But don't forget this one thing, beloved, that one day is with the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day.
The Lord is not slow concerning his promise, as some count slowness; but is patient with us, not wishing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance.
But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night; in which the heavens will pass away with a great noise, and the elements will be dissolved with fervent heat, and the earth and the works that are in it will be burned up.
Therefore since all these things will be destroyed like this, what kind of people ought you to be in holy living and godliness,
looking for and earnestly desiring the coming of the day of God, which will cause the burning heavens to be dissolved, and the elements will melt with fervent heat?
But, according to his promise, we look for new heavens and a new earth, in which righteousness dwells.
Therefore, beloved, seeing that you look for these things, be diligent to be found in peace, without blemish and blameless in his sight.
Regard the patience of our Lord as salvation; even as our beloved brother Paul also, according to the wisdom given to him, wrote to you;
as also in all of his letters, speaking in them of these things. In those, there are some things that are hard to understand, which the ignorant and unsettled twist, as they also do to the other Scriptures, to their own destruction.
You therefore, beloved, knowing these things beforehand, beware, lest being carried away with the error of the wicked, you fall from your own steadfastness.
But grow in the grace and knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. To him be the glory both now and forever. Amen.
Now before the feast of the Passover, Jesus, knowing that his time had come that he would depart from this world to the Father, having loved his own who were in the world, he loved them to the end.
After supper, the devil having already put into the heart of Judas Iscariot, Simon's son, to betray him,
Jesus, knowing that the Father had given all things into his hands, and that he came forth from God, and was going to God,
arose from supper, and laid aside his outer garments. He took a towel, and wrapped a towel around his waist.
Then he poured water into the basin, and began to wash the disciples' feet, and to wipe them with the towel that was wrapped around him.
Then he came to Simon Peter. He said to him, 'Lord, do you wash my feet?'
Jesus answered him, 'You don't know what I am doing now, but you will understand later.'
Peter said to him, 'You will never wash my feet!' Jesus answered him, 'If I don't wash you, you have no part with me.'
Simon Peter said to him, 'Lord, not my feet only, but also my hands and my head!'
Jesus said to him, 'Someone who has bathed only needs to have his feet washed, but is completely clean. You are clean, but not all of you.'
For he knew him who would betray him, therefore he said, 'You are not all clean.'
So when he had washed their feet, put his outer garment back on, and sat down again, he said to them, 'Do you know what I have done to you?
You call me, 'Teacher' and 'Lord.' You say so correctly, for so I am.
If I then, the Lord and the Teacher, have washed your feet, you also ought to wash one another's feet.
For I have given you an example, that you also should do as I have done to you.
Most certainly I tell you, a servant is not greater than his lord, neither one who is sent greater than he who sent him.
If you know these things, blessed are you if you do them.
I don't speak concerning all of you. I know whom I have chosen. But that the Scripture may be fulfilled, 'He who eats bread with me has lifted up his heel against me.'
From now on, I tell you before it happens, that when it happens, you may believe that I am he.
Most certainly I tell you, he who receives whomever I send, receives me; and he who receives me, receives him who sent me.'
When Jesus had said this, he was troubled in spirit, and testified, 'Most certainly I tell you that one of you will betray me.'
The disciples looked at one another, perplexed about whom he spoke.
One of his disciples, whom Jesus loved, was at the table, leaning against Jesus' breast.
Simon Peter therefore beckoned to him, and said to him, 'Tell us who it is of whom he speaks.'
He, leaning back, as he was, on Jesus' breast, asked him, 'Lord, who is it?'
Jesus therefore answered, 'It is he to whom I will give this piece of bread when I have dipped it.' So when he had dipped the piece of bread, he gave it to Judas, the son of Simon Iscariot.
After the piece of bread, then Satan entered into him. Then Jesus said to him, 'What you do, do quickly.'
Now no man at the table knew why he said this to him.
For some thought, because Judas had the money box, that Jesus said to him, 'Buy what things we need for the feast,' or that he should give something to the poor.
Therefore, having received that morsel, he went out immediately. It was night.
When he had gone out, Jesus said, 'Now the Son of Man has been glorified, and God has been glorified in him.
If God has been glorified in him, God will also glorify him in himself, and he will glorify him immediately.
Little children, I will be with you a little while longer. You will seek me, and as I said to the Jews, 'Where I am going, you can't come,' so now I tell you.
A new commandment I give to you, that you love one another, just like I have loved you; that you also love one another.
By this everyone will know that you are my disciples, if you have love for one another.'
Simon Peter said to him, 'Lord, where are you going?' Jesus answered, 'Where I am going, you can't follow now, but you will follow afterwards.'
Peter said to him, 'Lord, why can't I follow you now? I will lay down my life for you.'
Jesus answered him, 'Will you lay down your life for me? Most certainly I tell you, the rooster won't crow until you have denied me three times.
He also said to his disciples, 'There was a certain rich man who had a manager. An accusation was made to him that this man was wasting his possessions.
He called him, and said to him, 'What is this that I hear about you? Give an accounting of your management, for you can no longer be manager.'
'The manager said within himself, 'What will I do, seeing that my lord is taking away the management position from me? I don't have strength to dig. I am ashamed to beg.
I know what I will do, so that when I am removed from management, they may receive me into their houses.'
Calling each one of his lord's debtors to him, he said to the first, 'How much do you owe to my lord?'
He said, 'A hundred batos of oil.' He said to him, 'Take your bill, and sit down quickly and write fifty.'
Then said he to another, 'How much do you owe?' He said, 'A hundred cors of wheat.' He said to him, 'Take your bill, and write eighty.'
'His lord commended the dishonest manager because he had done wisely, for the children of this world are, in their own generation, wiser than the children of the light.
I tell you, make for yourselves friends by means of unrighteous mammon, so that when you fail, they may receive you into the eternal tents.
He who is faithful in a very little is faithful also in much. He who is dishonest in a very little is also dishonest in much.
If therefore you have not been faithful in the unrighteous mammon, who will commit to your trust the true riches?
If you have not been faithful in that which is another's, who will give you that which is your own?
No servant can serve two masters, for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to one, and despise the other. You aren't able to serve God and mammon.'
The Pharisees, who were lovers of money, also heard all these things, and they scoffed at him.
He said to them, 'You are those who justify yourselves in the sight of men, but God knows your hearts. For that which is exalted among men is an abomination in the sight of God.
The law and the prophets were until John. From that time the Good News of the Kingdom of God is preached, and everyone is forcing his way into it.
But it is easier for heaven and earth to pass away, than for one tiny stroke of a pen in the law to fall.
Everyone who divorces his wife, and marries another, commits adultery. He who marries one who is divorced from a husband commits adultery.
'Now there was a certain rich man, and he was clothed in purple and fine linen, living in luxury every day.
A certain beggar, named Lazarus, was laid at his gate, full of sores,
and desiring to be fed with the crumbs that fell from the rich man's table. Yes, even the dogs came and licked his sores.
It happened that the beggar died, and that he was carried away by the angels to Abraham's bosom. The rich man also died, and was buried.
In Hades, he lifted up his eyes, being in torment, and saw Abraham far off, and Lazarus at his bosom.
He cried and said, 'Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue! For I am in anguish in this flame.'
'But Abraham said, 'Son, remember that you, in your lifetime, received your good things, and Lazarus, in like manner, bad things. But now here he is comforted and you are in anguish.
Besides all this, between us and you there is a great gulf fixed, that those who want to pass from here to you are not able, and that none may cross over from there to us.'
'He said, 'I ask you therefore, father, that you would send him to my father's house;
for I have five brothers, that he may testify to them, so they won't also come into this place of torment.'
'But Abraham said to him, 'They have Moses and the prophets. Let them listen to them.'
'He said, 'No, father Abraham, but if one goes to them from the dead, they will repent.'
'He said to him, 'If they don't listen to Moses and the prophets, neither will they be persuaded if one rises from the dead.''
It is doubtless not profitable for me to boast. For I will come to visions and revelations of the Lord.
I know a man in Christ, fourteen years ago (whether in the body, I don't know, or whether out of the body, I don't know; God knows), such a one caught up into the third heaven.
I know such a man (whether in the body, or outside of the body, I don't know; God knows),
how he was caught up into Paradise, and heard unspeakable words, which it is not lawful for a man to utter.
On behalf of such a one I will boast, but on my own behalf I will not boast, except in my weaknesses.
For if I would desire to boast, I will not be foolish; for I will speak the truth. But I refrain, so that no man may think more of me than that which he sees in me, or hears from me.
By reason of the exceeding greatness of the revelations, that I should not be exalted excessively, there was given to me a thorn in the flesh, a messenger of Satan to torment me, that I should not be exalted excessively.
Concerning this thing, I begged the Lord three times that it might depart from me.
He has said to me, 'My grace is sufficient for you, for my power is made perfect in weakness.' Most gladly therefore I will rather glory in my weaknesses, that the power of Christ may rest on me.
Therefore I take pleasure in weaknesses, in injuries, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses, for Christ's sake. For when I am weak, then am I strong.
I have become foolish in boasting. You compelled me, for I ought to have been commended by you, for in nothing was I inferior to the very best apostles, though I am nothing.
Truly the signs of an apostle were worked among you in all patience, in signs and wonders and mighty works.
For what is there in which you were made inferior to the rest of the assemblies, unless it is that I myself was not a burden to you? Forgive me this wrong.
Behold, this is the third time I am ready to come to you, and I will not be a burden to you; for I seek not your possessions, but you. For the children ought not to save up for the parents, but the parents for the children.
I will most gladly spend and be spent for your souls. If I love you more abundantly, am I loved the less?
But be it so, I did not myself burden you. But, being crafty, I caught you with deception.
Did I take advantage of you by anyone of them whom I have sent to you?
I exhorted Titus, and I sent the brother with him. Did Titus take any advantage of you? Didn't we walk in the same spirit? Didn't we walk in the same steps?
Again, do you think that we are excusing ourselves to you? In the sight of God we speak in Christ. But all things, beloved, are for your edifying.
For I am afraid that by any means, when I come, I might find you not the way I want to, and that I might be found by you as you don't desire; that by any means there would be strife, jealousy, outbursts of anger, factions, slander, whisperings, proud thoughts, riots;
that again when I come my God would humble me before you, and I would mourn for many of those who have sinned before now, and not repented of the uncleanness and sexual immorality and lustfulness which they committed.
God, having in the past spoken to the fathers through the prophets at many times and in various ways,
has at the end of these days spoken to us by his Son, whom he appointed heir of all things, through whom also he made the worlds.
His Son is the radiance of his glory, the very image of his substance, and upholding all things by the word of his power, when he had by himself made purification for our sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high;
having become so much better than the angels, as he has inherited a more excellent name than they have.
For to which of the angels did he say at any time,  'You are my Son. Today have I become your father?'
Again, when he brings in the firstborn into the world he says, 'Let all the angels of God worship him.'
Of the angels he says, 'Who makes his angels winds, and his servants a flame of fire.'
But of the Son he says, 'Your throne, O God, is forever and ever. The scepter of uprightness is the scepter of your Kingdom.
You have loved righteousness, and hated iniquity; therefore God, your God, has anointed you with the oil of gladness above your fellows.'
And, 'You, Lord, in the beginning, laid the foundation of the earth. The heavens are the works of your hands.
They will perish, but you continue. They all will grow old like a garment does.
As a mantle, you will roll them up, and they will be changed; but you are the same. Your years will not fail.'
But which of the angels has he told at any time, 'Sit at my right hand, until I make your enemies the footstool of your feet?'
Aren't they all serving spirits, sent out to do service for the sake of those who will inherit salvation?
It happened in Iconium that they entered together into the synagogue of the Jews, and so spoke that a great multitude both of Jews and of Greeks believed.
But the disbelieving Jews stirred up and embittered the souls of the Gentiles against the brothers.
Therefore they stayed there a long time, speaking boldly in the Lord, who testified to the word of his grace, granting signs and wonders to be done by their hands.
But the multitude of the city was divided. Part sided with the Jews, and part with the apostles.
When some of both the Gentiles and the Jews, with their rulers, made a violent attempt to mistreat and stone them,
they became aware of it, and fled to the cities of Lycaonia, Lystra, Derbe, and the surrounding region.
There they preached the Good News.
At Lystra a certain man sat, impotent in his feet, a cripple from his mother's womb, who never had walked.
He was listening to Paul speaking, who, fastening eyes on him, and seeing that he had faith to be made whole,
said with a loud voice, 'Stand upright on your feet!' He leaped up and walked.
When the multitude saw what Paul had done, they lifted up their voice, saying in the language of Lycaonia, 'The gods have come down to us in the likeness of men!'
They called Barnabas 'Jupiter,' and Paul 'Mercury,' because he was the chief speaker.
The priest of Jupiter, whose temple was in front of their city, brought oxen and garlands to the gates, and would have made a sacrifice along with the multitudes.
But when the apostles, Barnabas and Paul, heard of it, they tore their clothes, and sprang into the multitude, crying out,
'Men, why are you doing these things? We also are men of like passions with you, and bring you good news, that you should turn from these vain things to the living God, who made the sky and the earth and the sea, and all that is in them;
who in the generations gone by allowed all the nations to walk in their own ways.
Yet he didn't leave himself without witness, in that he did good and gave you rains from the sky and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness.'
Even saying these things, they hardly stopped the multitudes from making a sacrifice to them.
But some Jews from Antioch and Iconium came there, and having persuaded the multitudes, they stoned Paul, and dragged him out of the city, supposing that he was dead.
But as the disciples stood around him, he rose up, and entered into the city. On the next day he went out with Barnabas to Derbe.
When they had preached the Good News to that city, and had made many disciples, they returned to Lystra, Iconium, and Antioch,
confirming the souls of the disciples, exhorting them to continue in the faith, and that through many afflictions we must enter into the Kingdom of God.
When they had appointed elders for them in every assembly, and had prayed with fasting, they commended them to the Lord, on whom they had believed.
They passed through Pisidia, and came to Pamphylia.
When they had spoken the word in Perga, they went down to Attalia.
From there they sailed to Antioch, from where they had been committed to the grace of God for the work which they had fulfilled.
When they had arrived, and had gathered the assembly together, they reported all the things that God had done with them, and that he had opened a door of faith to the nations.
They stayed there with the disciples for a long time.
Therefore, my brothers, beloved and longed for, my joy and crown, so stand firm in the Lord, my beloved.
I exhort Euodia, and I exhort Syntyche, to think the same way in the Lord.
Yes, I beg you also, true yokefellow, help these women, for they labored with me in the Good News, with Clement also, and the rest of my fellow workers, whose names are in the book of life.
Rejoice in the Lord always! Again I will say, Rejoice!
Let your gentleness be known to all men. The Lord is at hand.
In nothing be anxious, but in everything, by prayer and petition with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known to God.
And the peace of God, which surpasses all understanding, will guard your hearts and your thoughts in Christ Jesus.
Finally, brothers, whatever things are true, whatever things are honorable, whatever things are just, whatever things are pure, whatever things are lovely, whatever things are of good report; if there is any virtue, and if there is any praise, think about these things.
The things which you learned, received, heard, and saw in me: do these things, and the God of peace will be with you.
But I rejoice in the Lord greatly, that now at length you have revived your thought for me; in which you did indeed take thought, but you lacked opportunity.
Not that I speak in respect to lack, for I have learned in whatever state I am, to be content in it.
I know how to be humbled, and I know also how to abound. In everything and in all things I have learned the secret both to be filled and to be hungry, both to abound and to be in need.
I can do all things through Christ, who strengthens me.
However you did well that you shared in my affliction.
You yourselves also know, you Philippians, that in the beginning of the Good News, when I departed from Macedonia, no assembly shared with me in the matter of giving and receiving but you only.
For even in Thessalonica you sent once and again to my need.
Not that I seek for the gift, but I seek for the fruit that increases to your account.
But I have all things, and abound. I am filled, having received from Epaphroditus the things that came from you, a sweet-smelling fragrance, an acceptable and well-pleasing sacrifice to God.
My God will supply every need of yours according to his riches in glory in Christ Jesus.
Now to our God and Father be the glory forever and ever! Amen.
Greet every saint in Christ Jesus. The brothers who are with me greet you.
All the saints greet you, especially those who are of Caesar's household.
The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.
I saw a new heaven and a new earth: for the first heaven and the first earth have passed away, and the sea is no more.
I saw the holy city, New Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God, made ready like a bride adorned for her husband.
I heard a loud voice out of heaven saying, 'Behold, God's dwelling is with people, and he will dwell with them, and they will be his people, and God himself will be with them as their God.
He will wipe away from them every tear from their eyes. Death will be no more; neither will there be mourning, nor crying, nor pain, any more. The first things have passed away.'
He who sits on the throne said, 'Behold, I am making all things new.' He said, 'Write, for these words of God are faithful and true.'
He said to me, 'It is done! I am the Alpha and the Omega, the Beginning and the End. I will give freely to him who is thirsty from the spring of the water of life.
He who overcomes, I will give him these things. I will be his God, and he will be my son.
But for the cowardly, unbelieving, sinners, abominable, murderers, sexually immoral, sorcerers, idolaters, and all liars, their part is in the lake that burns with fire and sulfur, which is the second death.'
One of the seven angels who had the seven bowls, who were loaded with the seven last plagues came, and he spoke with me, saying, 'Come here. I will show you the wife, the Lamb's bride.'
He carried me away in the Spirit to a great and high mountain, and showed me the holy city, Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God,
having the glory of God. Her light was like a most precious stone, as if it was a jasper stone, clear as crystal;
having a great and high wall; having twelve gates, and at the gates twelve angels; and names written on them, which are the names of the twelve tribes of the children of Israel.
On the east were three gates; and on the north three gates; and on the south three gates; and on the west three gates.
The wall of the city had twelve foundations, and on them twelve names of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb.
He who spoke with me had for a measure, a golden reed, to measure the city, its gates, and its walls.
The city lies foursquare, and its length is as great as its breadth. He measured the city with the reed, Twelve thousand twelve stadia. Its length, breadth, and height are equal.
Its wall is one hundred forty-four cubits, by the measure of a man, that is, of an angel.
The construction of its wall was jasper. The city was pure gold, like pure glass.
The foundations of the city's wall were adorned with all kinds of precious stones. The first foundation was jasper; the second, sapphire; the third, chalcedony; the fourth, emerald;
the fifth, sardonyx; the sixth, sardius; the seventh, chrysolite; the eighth, beryl; the ninth, topaz; the tenth, chrysoprasus; the eleventh, jacinth; and the twelfth, amethyst.
The twelve gates were twelve pearls. Each one of the gates was made of one pearl. The street of the city was pure gold, like transparent glass.
I saw no temple in it, for the Lord God, the Almighty, and the Lamb, are its temple.
The city has no need for the sun, neither of the moon, to shine, for the very glory of God illuminated it, and its lamp is the Lamb.
The nations will walk in its light. The kings of the earth bring the glory and honor of the nations into it.
Its gates will in no way be shut by day (for there will be no night there),
and they shall bring the glory and the honor of the nations into it so that they may enter.
There will in no way enter into it anything profane, or one who causes an abomination or a lie, but only those who are written in the Lamb's book of life.
When they drew near to Jerusalem, and came to Bethsphage, to the Mount of Olives, then Jesus sent two disciples,
saying to them, 'Go into the village that is opposite you, and immediately you will find a donkey tied, and a colt with her. Untie them, and bring them to me.
If anyone says anything to you, you shall say, 'The Lord needs them,' and immediately he will send them.'
All this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through the prophet, saying,
'Tell the daughter of Zion, behold, your King comes to you, humble, and riding on a donkey, on a colt, the foal of a donkey.'
The disciples went, and did just as Jesus commanded them,
and brought the donkey and the colt, and laid their clothes on them; and he sat on them.
A very great multitude spread their clothes on the road. Others cut branches from the trees, and spread them on the road.
The multitudes who went before him, and who followed kept shouting, 'Hosanna
When he had come into Jerusalem, all the city was stirred up, saying, 'Who is this?'
The multitudes said, 'This is the prophet, Jesus, from Nazareth of Galilee.'
Jesus entered into the temple of God, and drove out all of those who sold and bought in the temple, and overthrew the money changers' tables and the seats of those who sold the doves.
He said to them, 'It is written, 'My house shall be called a house of prayer,'
The blind and the lame came to him in the temple, and he healed them.
But when the chief priests and the scribes saw the wonderful things that he did, and the children who were crying in the temple and saying, 'Hosanna to the son of David!' they were indignant,
and said to him, 'Do you hear what these are saying?' Jesus said to them, 'Yes. Did you never read, 'Out of the mouth of babes and nursing babies you have perfected praise?''
He left them, and went out of the city to Bethany, and lodged there.
Now in the morning, as he returned to the city, he was hungry.
Seeing a fig tree by the road, he came to it, and found nothing on it but leaves. He said to it, 'Let there be no fruit from you forever!' Immediately the fig tree withered away.
When the disciples saw it, they marveled, saying, 'How did the fig tree immediately wither away?'
Jesus answered them, 'Most certainly I tell you, if you have faith, and don't doubt, you will not only do what was done to the fig tree, but even if you told this mountain, 'Be taken up and cast into the sea,' it would be done.
All things, whatever you ask in prayer, believing, you will receive.'
When he had come into the temple, the chief priests and the elders of the people came to him as he was teaching, and said, 'By what authority do you do these things? Who gave you this authority?'
Jesus answered them, 'I also will ask you one question, which if you tell me, I likewise will tell you by what authority I do these things.
The baptism of John, where was it from? From heaven or from men?' They reasoned with themselves, saying, 'If we say, 'From heaven,' he will ask us, 'Why then did you not believe him?'
But if we say, 'From men,' we fear the multitude, for all hold John as a prophet.'
They answered Jesus, and said, 'We don't know.' He also said to them, 'Neither will I tell you by what authority I do these things.
But what do you think? A man had two sons, and he came to the first, and said, 'Son, go work today in my vineyard.'
He answered, 'I will not,' but afterward he changed his mind, and went.
He came to the second, and said the same thing. He answered, 'I go, sir,' but he didn't go.
Which of the two did the will of his father?' They said to him, 'The first.' Jesus said to them, 'Most certainly I tell you that the tax collectors and the prostitutes are entering into the Kingdom of God before you.
For John came to you in the way of righteousness, and you didn't believe him, but the tax collectors and the prostitutes believed him. When you saw it, you didn't even repent afterward, that you might believe him.
'Hear another parable. There was a man who was a master of a household, who planted a vineyard, set a hedge about it, dug a winepress in it, built a tower, leased it out to farmers, and went into another country.
When the season for the fruit drew near, he sent his servants to the farmers, to receive his fruit.
The farmers took his servants, beat one, killed another, and stoned another.
Again, he sent other servants more than the first: and they treated them the same way.
But afterward he sent to them his son, saying, 'They will respect my son.'
But the farmers, when they saw the son, said among themselves, 'This is the heir. Come, let's kill him, and seize his inheritance.'
So they took him, and threw him out of the vineyard, and killed him.
When therefore the lord of the vineyard comes, what will he do to those farmers?'
They told him, 'He will miserably destroy those miserable men, and will lease out the vineyard to other farmers, who will give him the fruit in its season.'
Jesus said to them, 'Did you never read in the Scriptures, 'The stone which the builders rejected, the same was made the head of the corner. This was from the Lord. It is marvelous in our eyes?'
'Therefore I tell you, the Kingdom of God will be taken away from you, and will be given to a nation bringing forth its fruit.
He who falls on this stone will be broken to pieces, but on whoever it will fall, it will scatter him as dust.'
When the chief priests and the Pharisees heard his parables, they perceived that he spoke about them.
When they sought to seize him, they feared the multitudes, because they considered him to be a prophet.
Now when the day of Pentecost had come, they were all with one accord in one place.
Suddenly there came from the sky a sound like the rushing of a mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they were sitting.
Tongues like fire appeared and were distributed to them, and one sat on each of them.
They were all filled with the Holy Spirit, and began to speak with other languages, as the Spirit gave them the ability to speak.
Now there were dwelling in Jerusalem Jews, devout men, from every nation under the sky.
When this sound was heard, the multitude came together, and were bewildered, because everyone heard them speaking in his own language.
They were all amazed and marveled, saying to one another, 'Behold, aren't all these who speak Galileans?
How do we hear, everyone in our own native language?
Parthians, Medes, Elamites, and people from Mesopotamia, Judea, Cappadocia, Pontus, Asia,
Phrygia, Pamphylia, Egypt, the parts of Libya around Cyrene, visitors from Rome, both Jews and proselytes,
Cretans and Arabians: we hear them speaking in our languages the mighty works of God!'
They were all amazed, and were perplexed, saying one to another, 'What does this mean?'
Others, mocking, said, 'They are filled with new wine.'
But Peter, standing up with the eleven, lifted up his voice, and spoke out to them, 'You men of Judea, and all you who dwell at Jerusalem, let this be known to you, and listen to my words.
For these aren't drunken, as you suppose, seeing it is only the third hour of the day.
But this is what has been spoken through the prophet Joel:
'It will be in the last days, says God, that I will pour out my Spirit on all flesh. Your sons and your daughters will prophesy. Your young men will see visions. Your old men will dream dreams.
Yes, and on my servants and on my handmaidens in those days, I will pour out my Spirit, and they will prophesy.
I will show wonders in the sky above, and signs on the earth beneath; blood, and fire, and billows of smoke.
The sun will be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the great and glorious day of the Lord comes.
It will be, that whoever will call on the name of the Lord will be saved.'
'Men of Israel, hear these words! Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved by God to you by mighty works and wonders and signs which God did by him in the midst of you, even as you yourselves know,
him, being delivered up by the determined counsel and foreknowledge of God, you have taken by the hand of lawless men, crucified and killed;
whom God raised up, having freed him from the agony of death, because it was not possible that he should be held by it.
For David says concerning him, 'I saw the Lord always before my face, For he is on my right hand, that I should not be moved.
Therefore my heart was glad, and my tongue rejoiced. Moreover my flesh also will dwell in hope;
because you will not leave my soul in Hades, neither will you allow your Holy One to see decay.
You made known to me the ways of life. You will make me full of gladness with your presence.'
'Brothers, I may tell you freely of the patriarch David, that he both died and was buried, and his tomb is with us to this day.
Therefore, being a prophet, and knowing that God had sworn with an oath to him that of the fruit of his body, according to the flesh, he would raise up the Christ to sit on his throne,
he foreseeing this spoke about the resurrection of the Christ, that neither was his soul left in Hades, nor did his flesh see decay.
This Jesus God raised up, to which we all are witnesses.
Being therefore exalted by the right hand of God, and having received from the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, he has poured out this, which you now see and hear.
For David didn't ascend into the heavens, but he says himself, 'The Lord said to my Lord, 'Sit by my right hand,
until I make your enemies a footstool for your feet.''
'Let all the house of Israel therefore know certainly that God has made him both Lord and Christ, this Jesus whom you crucified.'
Now when they heard this, they were cut to the heart, and said to Peter and the rest of the apostles, 'Brothers, what shall we do?'
Peter said to them, 'Repent, and be baptized, every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ for the forgiveness of sins, and you will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit.
For to you is the promise, and to your children, and to all who are far off, even as many as the Lord our God will call to himself.'
With many other words he testified, and exhorted them, saying, 'Save yourselves from this crooked generation!'
Then those who gladly received his word were baptized. There were added that day about three thousand souls.
They continued steadfastly in the apostles' teaching and fellowship, in the breaking of bread, and prayer.
Fear came on every soul, and many wonders and signs were done through the apostles.
All who believed were together, and had all things in common.
They sold their possessions and goods, and distributed them to all, according as anyone had need.
Day by day, continuing steadfastly with one accord in the temple, and breaking bread at home, they took their food with gladness and singleness of heart,
praising God, and having favor with all the people. The Lord added to the assembly day by day those who were being saved.
Come now, you rich, weep and howl for your miseries that are coming on you.
Your riches are corrupted and your garments are moth-eaten.
Your gold and your silver are corroded, and their corrosion will be for a testimony against you, and will eat your flesh like fire. You have laid up your treasure in the last days.
Behold, the wages of the laborers who mowed your fields, which you have kept back by fraud, cry out, and the cries of those who reaped have entered into the ears of the Lord of Armies.
You have lived delicately on the earth, and taken your pleasure. You have nourished your hearts as in a day of slaughter.
You have condemned, you have murdered the righteous one. He doesn't resist you.
Be patient therefore, brothers, until the coming of the Lord. Behold, the farmer waits for the precious fruit of the earth, being patient over it, until it receives the early and late rain.
You also be patient. Establish your hearts, for the coming of the Lord is at hand.
Don't grumble, brothers, against one another, so that you won't be judged. Behold, the judge stands at the door.
Take, brothers, for an example of suffering and of patience, the prophets who spoke in the name of the Lord.
Behold, we call them blessed who endured. You have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the Lord in the outcome, and how the Lord is full of compassion and mercy.
But above all things, my brothers, don't swear, neither by heaven, nor by the earth, nor by any other oath; but let your 'yes' be 'yes,' and your 'no,' 'no;' so that you don't fall into hypocrisy.
Is any among you suffering? Let him pray. Is any cheerful? Let him sing praises.
Is any among you sick? Let him call for the elders of the assembly, and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord,
and the prayer of faith will heal him who is sick, and the Lord will raise him up. If he has committed sins, he will be forgiven.
Confess your offenses to one another, and pray for one another, that you may be healed. The insistent prayer of a righteous person is powerfully effective.
Elijah was a man with a nature like ours, and he prayed earnestly that it might not rain, and it didn't rain on the earth for three years and six months.
He prayed again, and the sky gave rain, and the earth brought forth its fruit.
Brothers, if any among you wanders from the truth, and someone turns him back,
let him know that he who turns a sinner from the error of his way will save a soul from death, and will cover a multitude of sins.
Where do wars and fightings among you come from? Don't they come from your pleasures that war in your members?
You lust, and don't have. You kill, covet, and can't obtain. You fight and make war. You don't have, because you don't ask.
You ask, and don't receive, because you ask with wrong motives, so that you may spend it for your pleasures.
You adulterers and adulteresses, don't you know that friendship with the world is enmity with God? Whoever therefore wants to be a friend of the world makes himself an enemy of God.
Or do you think that the Scripture says in vain, 'The Spirit who lives in us yearns jealously'?
But he gives more grace. Therefore it says, 'God resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble.'
Be subject therefore to God. But resist the devil, and he will flee from you.
Draw near to God, and he will draw near to you. Cleanse your hands, you sinners; and purify your hearts, you double-minded.
Lament, mourn, and weep. Let your laughter be turned to mourning, and your joy to gloom.
Humble yourselves in the sight of the Lord, and he will exalt you.
Don't speak against one another, brothers. He who speaks against a brother and judges his brother, speaks against the law and judges the law. But if you judge the law, you are not a doer of the law, but a judge.
Only one is the lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy. But who are you to judge another?
Come now, you who say, 'Today or tomorrow let's go into this city, and spend a year there, trade, and make a profit.'
Whereas you don't know what your life will be like tomorrow. For what is your life? For you are a vapor, that appears for a little time, and then vanishes away.
For you ought to say, 'If the Lord wills, we will both live, and do this or that.'
But now you glory in your boasting. All such boasting is evil.
To him therefore who knows to do good, and doesn't do it, to him it is sin.
'For the Kingdom of Heaven is like a man who was the master of a household, who went out early in the morning to hire laborers for his vineyard.
When he had agreed with the laborers for a denarius a day, he sent them into his vineyard.
He went out about the third hour, and saw others standing idle in the marketplace.
To them he said, 'You also go into the vineyard, and whatever is right I will give you.' So they went their way.
Again he went out about the sixth and the ninth hour, and did likewise.
About the eleventh hour he went out, and found others standing idle. He said to them, 'Why do you stand here all day idle?'
'They said to him, 'Because no one has hired us.' 'He said to them, 'You also go into the vineyard, and you will receive whatever is right.'
When evening had come, the lord of the vineyard said to his manager, 'Call the laborers and pay them their wages, beginning from the last to the first.'
'When those who were hired at about the eleventh hour came, they each received a denarius.
When the first came, they supposed that they would receive more; and they likewise each received a denarius.
When they received it, they murmured against the master of the household,
saying, 'These last have spent one hour, and you have made them equal to us, who have borne the burden of the day and the scorching heat!'
'But he answered one of them, 'Friend, I am doing you no wrong. Didn't you agree with me for a denarius?
Take that which is yours, and go your way. It is my desire to give to this last just as much as to you.
Isn't it lawful for me to do what I want to with what I own? Or is your eye evil, because I am good?'
So the last will be first, and the first last. For many are called, but few are chosen.'
As Jesus was going up to Jerusalem, he took the twelve disciples aside, and on the way he said to them,
'Behold, we are going up to Jerusalem, and the Son of Man will be delivered to the chief priests and scribes, and they will condemn him to death,
and will hand him over to the Gentiles to mock, to scourge, and to crucify; and the third day he will be raised up.'
Then the mother of the sons of Zebedee came to him with her sons, kneeling and asking a certain thing of him.
He said to her, 'What do you want?' She said to him, 'Command that these, my two sons, may sit, one on your right hand, and one on your left hand, in your Kingdom.'
But Jesus answered, 'You don't know what you are asking. Are you able to drink the cup that I am about to drink, and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?' They said to him, 'We are able.'
He said to them, 'You will indeed drink my cup, and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with, but to sit on my right hand and on my left hand is not mine to give; but it is for whom it has been prepared by my Father.'
When the ten heard it, they were indignant with the two brothers.
But Jesus summoned them, and said, 'You know that the rulers of the nations lord it over them, and their great ones exercise authority over them.
It shall not be so among you, but whoever desires to become great among you shall be your servant.
Whoever desires to be first among you shall be your bondservant,
even as the Son of Man came not to be served, but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many.'
As they went out from Jericho, a great multitude followed him.
Behold, two blind men sitting by the road, when they heard that Jesus was passing by, cried out, 'Lord, have mercy on us, you son of David!'
The multitude rebuked them, telling them that they should be quiet, but they cried out even more, 'Lord, have mercy on us, you son of David!'
Jesus stood still, and called them, and asked, 'What do you want me to do for you?'
They told him, 'Lord, that our eyes may be opened.'
Jesus, being moved with compassion, touched their eyes; and immediately their eyes received their sight, and they followed him.
Peter and John were going up into the temple at the hour of prayer, the ninth hour.
A certain man who was lame from his mother's womb was being carried, whom they laid daily at the door of the temple which is called Beautiful, to ask gifts for the needy of those who entered into the temple.
Seeing Peter and John about to go into the temple, he asked to receive gifts for the needy.
Peter, fastening his eyes on him, with John, said, 'Look at us.'
He listened to them, expecting to receive something from them.
But Peter said, 'Silver and gold have I none, but what I have, that I give you. In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, get up and walk!'
He took him by the right hand, and raised him up. Immediately his feet and his ankle bones received strength.
Leaping up, he stood, and began to walk. He entered with them into the temple, walking, leaping, and praising God.
All the people saw him walking and praising God.
They recognized him, that it was he who used to sit begging for gifts for the needy at the Beautiful Gate of the temple. They were filled with wonder and amazement at what had happened to him.
As the lame man who was healed held on to Peter and John, all the people ran together to them in the porch that is called Solomon's, greatly wondering.
When Peter saw it, he responded to the people, 'You men of Israel, why do you marvel at this man? Why do you fasten your eyes on us, as though by our own power or godliness we had made him walk?
The God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the God of our fathers, has glorified his Servant Jesus, whom you delivered up, and denied in the presence of Pilate, when he had determined to release him.
But you denied the Holy and Righteous One, and asked for a murderer to be granted to you,
and killed the Prince of life, whom God raised from the dead, to which we are witnesses.
By faith in his name, his name has made this man strong, whom you see and know. Yes, the faith which is through him has given him this perfect soundness in the presence of you all.
'Now, brothers, I know that you did this in ignorance, as did also your rulers.
But the things which God announced by the mouth of all his prophets, that Christ should suffer, he thus fulfilled.
'Repent therefore, and turn again, that your sins may be blotted out, so that there may come times of refreshing from the presence of the Lord,
and that he may send Christ Jesus, who was ordained for you before,
whom heaven must receive until the times of restoration of all things, which God spoke long ago by the mouth of his holy prophets.
For Moses indeed said to the fathers, 'The Lord God will raise up a prophet for you from among your brothers, like me. You shall listen to him in all things whatever he says to you.
It will be, that every soul that will not listen to that prophet will be utterly destroyed from among the people.'
Yes, and all the prophets from Samuel and those who followed after, as many as have spoken, they also told of these days.
You are the children of the prophets, and of the covenant which God made with our fathers, saying to Abraham, 'In your seed will all the families of the earth be blessed.'
God, having raised up his servant, Jesus, sent him to you first, to bless you, in turning away everyone of you from your wickedness.'
I saw an angel coming down out of heaven, having the key of the abyss and a great chain in his hand.
He seized the dragon, the old serpent, which is the devil and Satan, who deceives the whole inhabited earth, and bound him for a thousand years,
and cast him into the abyss, and shut it, and sealed it over him, that he should deceive the nations no more, until the thousand years were finished. After this, he must be freed for a short time.
I saw thrones, and they sat on them, and judgment was given to them. I saw the souls of those who had been beheaded for the testimony of Jesus, and for the word of God, and such as didn't worship the beast nor his image, and didn't receive the mark on their forehead and on their hand. They lived, and reigned with Christ for a thousand years.
The rest of the dead didn't live until the thousand years were finished. This is the first resurrection.
Blessed and holy is he who has part in the first resurrection. Over these, the second death has no power, but they will be priests of God and of Christ, and will reign with him one thousand years.
And after the thousand years, Satan will be released from his prison,
and he will come out to deceive the nations which are in the four corners of the earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together to the war; the number of whom is as the sand of the sea.
They went up over the breadth of the earth, and surrounded the camp of the saints, and the beloved city. Fire came down out of heaven from God, and devoured them.
The devil who deceived them was thrown into the lake of fire and sulfur, where the beast and the false prophet are also. They will be tormented day and night forever and ever.
I saw a great white throne, and him who sat on it, from whose face the earth and the heaven fled away. There was found no place for them.
I saw the dead, the great and the small, standing before the throne, and they opened books. Another book was opened, which is the book of life. The dead were judged out of the things which were written in the books, according to their works.
The sea gave up the dead who were in it. Death and Hades gave up the dead who were in them. They were judged, each one according to his works.
Death and Hades were thrown into the lake of fire. This is the second death, the lake of fire.
If anyone was not found written in the book of life, he was cast into the lake of fire.
Some men came down from Judea and taught the brothers, 'Unless you are circumcised after the custom of Moses, you can't be saved.'
Therefore when Paul and Barnabas had no small discord and discussion with them, they appointed Paul and Barnabas, and some others of them, to go up to Jerusalem to the apostles and elders about this question.
They, being sent on their way by the assembly, passed through both Phoenicia and Samaria, declaring the conversion of the Gentiles. They caused great joy to all the brothers.
When they had come to Jerusalem, they were received by the assembly and the apostles and the elders, and they reported all things that God had done with them.
But some of the sect of the Pharisees who believed rose up, saying, 'It is necessary to circumcise them, and to command them to keep the law of Moses.'
The apostles and the elders were gathered together to see about this matter.
When there had been much discussion, Peter rose up and said to them, 'Brothers, you know that a good while ago God made a choice among you, that by my mouth the nations should hear the word of the Good News, and believe.
God, who knows the heart, testified about them, giving them the Holy Spirit, just like he did to us.
He made no distinction between us and them, cleansing their hearts by faith.
Now therefore why do you tempt God, that you should put a yoke on the neck of the disciples which neither our fathers nor we were able to bear?
But we believe that we are saved through the grace of the Lord Jesus, just as they are.'
All the multitude kept silence, and they listened to Barnabas and Paul reporting what signs and wonders God had done among the nations through them.
After they were silent, James answered, 'Brothers, listen to me.
Simeon has reported how God first visited the nations, to take out of them a people for his name.
This agrees with the words of the prophets. As it is written,
'After these things I will return. I will again build the tabernacle of David, which has fallen. I will again build its ruins. I will set it up,
That the rest of men may seek after the Lord; All the Gentiles who are called by my name, Says the Lord, who does all these things.
All his works are known to God from eternity.'
'Therefore my judgment is that we don't trouble those from among the Gentiles who turn to God,
but that we write to them that they abstain from the pollution of idols, from sexual immorality, from what is strangled, and from blood.
For Moses from generations of old has in every city those who preach him, being read in the synagogues every Sabbath.'
Then it seemed good to the apostles and the elders, with the whole assembly, to choose men out of their company, and send them to Antioch with Paul and Barnabas: Judas called Barsabbas, and Silas, chief men among the brothers.
They wrote these things by their hand: 'The apostles, the elders, and the brothers, to the brothers who are of the Gentiles in Antioch, Syria, and Cilicia: greetings.
Because we have heard that some who went out from us have troubled you with words, unsettling your souls, saying, 'You must be circumcised and keep the law,' to whom we gave no commandment;
it seemed good to us, having come to one accord, to choose out men and send them to you with our beloved Barnabas and Paul,
men who have risked their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.
We have sent therefore Judas and Silas, who themselves will also tell you the same things by word of mouth.
For it seemed good to the Holy Spirit, and to us, to lay no greater burden on you than these necessary things:
that you abstain from things sacrificed to idols, from blood, from things strangled, and from sexual immorality, from which if you keep yourselves, it will be well with you. Farewell.'
So, when they were sent off, they came to Antioch. Having gathered the multitude together, they delivered the letter.
When they had read it, they rejoiced over the encouragement.
Judas and Silas, also being prophets themselves, encouraged the brothers with many words, and strengthened them.
After they had spent some time there, they were sent back with greetings from the brothers to the apostles.

But Paul and Barnabas stayed in Antioch, teaching and preaching the word of the Lord, with many others also.
After some days Paul said to Barnabas, 'Let's return now and visit our brothers in every city in which we proclaimed the word of the Lord, to see how they are doing.'
Barnabas planned to take John, who was called Mark, with them also.
But Paul didn't think that it was a good idea to take with them someone who had withdrawn from them in Pamphylia, and didn't go with them to do the work.
Then the contention grew so sharp that they separated from each other. Barnabas took Mark with him, and sailed away to Cyprus,
but Paul chose Silas, and went out, being commended by the brothers to the grace of God.
He went through Syria and Cilicia, strengthening the assemblies.
This is the third time I am coming to you. 'At the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established.'
I have said beforehand, and I do say beforehand, as when I was present the second time, so now, being absent, I write to those who have sinned before now, and to all the rest, that, if I come again, I will not spare;
seeing that you seek a proof of Christ who speaks in me; who toward you is not weak, but is powerful in you.
For he was crucified through weakness, yet he lives through the power of God. For we also are weak in him, but we will live with him through the power of God toward you.
Test your own selves, whether you are in the faith. Test your own selves. Or don't you know as to your own selves, that Jesus Christ is in you?--unless indeed you are disqualified.
But I hope that you will know that we aren't disqualified.
Now I pray to God that you do no evil; not that we may appear approved, but that you may do that which is honorable, though we are as reprobate.
For we can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth.
For we rejoice when we are weak and you are strong. And this we also pray for, even your perfecting.
For this cause I write these things while absent, that I may not deal sharply when present, according to the authority which the Lord gave me for building up, and not for tearing down.
Finally, brothers, rejoice. Be perfected, be comforted, be of the same mind, live in peace, and the God of love and peace will be with you.
Greet one another with a holy kiss.
All the saints greet you.
When he entered again into Capernaum after some days, it was heard that he was in the house.
Immediately many were gathered together, so that there was no more room, not even around the door; and he spoke the word to them.
Four people came, carrying a paralytic to him.
When they could not come near to him for the crowd, they removed the roof where he was. When they had broken it up, they let down the mat that the paralytic was lying on.
Jesus, seeing their faith, said to the paralytic, 'Son, your sins are forgiven you.'
But there were some of the scribes sitting there, and reasoning in their hearts,
Why does this man speak blasphemies like that? Who can forgive sins but God alone?'
Immediately Jesus, perceiving in his spirit that they so reasoned within themselves, said to them, 'Why do you reason these things in your hearts?
Which is easier, to tell the paralytic, 'Your sins are forgiven;' or to say, 'Arise, and take up your bed, and walk?'
But that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins'--he said to the paralytic--
I tell you, arise, take up your mat, and go to your house.'
He arose, and immediately took up the mat, and went out in front of them all; so that they were all amazed, and glorified God, saying, 'We never saw anything like this!'
He went out again by the seaside. All the multitude came to him, and he taught them.
As he passed by, he saw Levi, the son of Alphaeus, sitting at the tax office, and he said to him, 'Follow me.' And he arose and followed him.
It happened, that he was reclining at the table in his house, and many tax collectors and sinners sat down with Jesus and his disciples, for there were many, and they followed him.
The scribes and the Pharisees, when they saw that he was eating with the sinners and tax collectors, said to his disciples, 'Why is it that he eats and drinks with tax collectors and sinners?'
When Jesus heard it, he said to them, 'Those who are healthy have no need for a physician, but those who are sick. I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.'
John's disciples and the Pharisees were fasting, and they came and asked him, 'Why do John's disciples and the disciples of the Pharisees fast, but your disciples don't fast?'
Jesus said to them, 'Can the groomsmen fast while the bridegroom is with them? As long as they have the bridegroom with them, they can't fast.
But the days will come when the bridegroom will be taken away from them, and then will they fast in that day.
No one sews a piece of unshrunk cloth on an old garment, or else the patch shrinks and the new tears away from the old, and a worse hole is made.
No one puts new wine into old wineskins, or else the new wine will burst the skins, and the wine pours out, and the skins will be destroyed; but they put new wine into fresh wineskins.'
It happened that he was going on the Sabbath day through the grain fields, and his disciples began, as they went, to pluck the ears of grain.
The Pharisees said to him, 'Behold, why do they do that which is not lawful on the Sabbath day?'
He said to them, 'Did you never read what David did, when he had need, and was hungry--he, and those who were with him?
How he entered into the house of God when Abiathar was high priest, and ate the show bread, which is not lawful to eat except for the priests, and gave also to those who were with him?'
He said to them, 'The Sabbath was made for man, not man for the Sabbath.
Therefore the Son of Man is lord even of the Sabbath.'
But false prophets also arose among the people, as false teachers will also be among you, who will secretly bring in destructive heresies, denying even the Master who bought them, bringing on themselves swift destruction.
Many will follow their immoral ways, and as a result, the way of the truth will be maligned.
In covetousness they will exploit you with deceptive words: whose sentence now from of old doesn't linger, and their destruction will not slumber.
For if God didn't spare angels when they sinned, but cast them down to Tartarus, and committed them to pits of darkness, to be reserved for judgment;
and didn't spare the ancient world, but preserved Noah with seven others, a preacher of righteousness, when he brought a flood on the world of the ungodly;
and turning the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes, condemned them to destruction, having made them an example to those who would live ungodly;
and delivered righteous Lot, who was very distressed by the lustful life of the wicked
(for that righteous man dwelling among them, was tormented in his righteous soul from day to day with seeing and hearing lawless deeds):
the Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptation and to keep the unrighteous under punishment for the day of judgment;
but chiefly those who walk after the flesh in the lust of defilement, and despise authority. Daring, self-willed, they are not afraid to speak evil of dignitaries;
whereas angels, though greater in might and power, don't bring a railing judgment against them before the Lord.
But these, as unreasoning creatures, born natural animals to be taken and destroyed, speaking evil in matters about which they are ignorant, will in their destroying surely be destroyed,
receiving the wages of unrighteousness; people who count it pleasure to revel in the daytime, spots and blemishes, reveling in their deceit while they feast with you;
having eyes full of adultery, and who can't cease from sin; enticing unsettled souls; having a heart trained in greed; children of cursing;
forsaking the right way, they went astray, having followed the way of Balaam the son of Beor, who loved the wages of wrongdoing;
but he was rebuked for his own disobedience. A mute donkey spoke with a man's voice and stopped the madness of the prophet.
These are wells without water, clouds driven by a storm; for whom the blackness of darkness has been reserved forever.
For, uttering great swelling words of emptiness, they entice in the lusts of the flesh, by licentiousness, those who are indeed escaping from those who live in error;
promising them liberty, while they themselves are bondservants of corruption; for a man is brought into bondage by whoever overcomes him.
For if, after they have escaped the defilement of the world through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are again entangled in it and overcome, the last state has become worse for them than the first.
For it would be better for them not to have known the way of righteousness, than, after knowing it, to turn back from the holy commandment delivered to them.
But it has happened to them according to the true proverb, 'The dog turns to his own vomit again,' and 'the sow that has washed to wallowing in the mire.'
Then six days before the Passover, Jesus came to Bethany, where Lazarus was, who had been dead, whom he raised from the dead.
So they made him a supper there. Martha served, but Lazarus was one of those who sat at the table with him.
Mary, therefore, took a pound of ointment of pure nard, very precious, and anointed the feet of Jesus, and wiped his feet with her hair. The house was filled with the fragrance of the ointment.
Then Judas Iscariot, Simon's son, one of his disciples, who would betray him, said,
'Why wasn't this ointment sold for three hundred denarii, and given to the poor?'
Now he said this, not because he cared for the poor, but because he was a thief, and having the money box, used to steal what was put into it.
But Jesus said, 'Leave her alone. She has kept this for the day of my burial.
For you always have the poor with you, but you don't always have me.'
A large crowd therefore of the Jews learned that he was there, and they came, not for Jesus' sake only, but that they might see Lazarus also, whom he had raised from the dead.
But the chief priests conspired to put Lazarus to death also,
because on account of him many of the Jews went away and believed in Jesus.
On the next day a great multitude had come to the feast. When they heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem,
they took the branches of the palm trees, and went out to meet him, and cried out, 'Hosanna the King of Israel!'
Jesus, having found a young donkey, sat on it. As it is written,
'Don't be afraid, daughter of Zion. Behold, your King comes, sitting on a donkey's colt.'
His disciples didn't understand these things at first, but when Jesus was glorified, then they remembered that these things were written about him, and that they had done these things to him.
The multitude therefore that was with him when he called Lazarus out of the tomb, and raised him from the dead, was testifying about it.
For this cause also the multitude went and met him, because they heard that he had done this sign.
The Pharisees therefore said among themselves, 'See how you accomplish nothing. Behold, the world has gone after him.'
Now there were certain Greeks among those that went up to worship at the feast.
These, therefore, came to Philip, who was from Bethsaida of Galilee, and asked him, saying, 'Sir, we want to see Jesus.'
Philip came and told Andrew, and in turn, Andrew came with Philip, and they told Jesus.
Jesus answered them, 'The time has come for the Son of Man to be glorified.
Most certainly I tell you, unless a grain of wheat falls into the earth and dies, it remains by itself alone. But if it dies, it bears much fruit.
He who loves his life will lose it. He who hates his life in this world will keep it to eternal life.
If anyone serves me, let him follow me. Where I am, there will my servant also be. If anyone serves me, the Father will honor him.
'Now my soul is troubled. What shall I say? 'Father, save me from this time?' But for this cause I came to this time.
Father, glorify your name!' Then there came a voice out of the sky, saying, 'I have both glorified it, and will glorify it again.'
The multitude therefore, who stood by and heard it, said that it had thundered. Others said, 'An angel has spoken to him.'
Jesus answered, 'This voice hasn't come for my sake, but for your sakes.
Now is the judgment of this world. Now the prince of this world will be cast out.
And I, if I am lifted up from the earth, will draw all people to myself.'
But he said this, signifying by what kind of death he should die.
The multitude answered him, 'We have heard out of the law that the Christ remains forever. How do you say, 'The Son of Man must be lifted up?' Who is this Son of Man?'
Jesus therefore said to them, 'Yet a little while the light is with you. Walk while you have the light, that darkness doesn't overtake you. He who walks in the darkness doesn't know where he is going.
While you have the light, believe in the light, that you may become children of light.' Jesus said these things, and he departed and hid himself from them.
But though he had done so many signs before them, yet they didn't believe in him,
that the word of Isaiah the prophet might be fulfilled, which he spoke, 'Lord, who has believed our report? To whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed?'
For this cause they couldn't believe, for Isaiah said again,
'He has blinded their eyes and he hardened their heart, lest they should see with their eyes, and perceive with their heart, and would turn, and I would heal them.'
Isaiah said these things when he saw his glory, and spoke of him.
Nevertheless even of the rulers many believed in him, but because of the Pharisees they didn't confess it, so that they wouldn't be put out of the synagogue,
for they loved men's praise more than God's praise.
Jesus cried out and said, 'Whoever believes in me, believes not in me, but in him who sent me.
He who sees me sees him who sent me.
I have come as a light into the world, that whoever believes in me may not remain in the darkness.
If anyone listens to my sayings, and doesn't believe, I don't judge him. For I came not to judge the world, but to save the world.
He who rejects me, and doesn't receive my sayings, has one who judges him. The word that I spoke, the same will judge him in the last day.
For I spoke not from myself, but the Father who sent me, he gave me a commandment, what I should say, and what I should speak.
I know that his commandment is eternal life. The things therefore which I speak, even as the Father has said to me, so I speak.'
He said to the disciples, 'It is impossible that no occasions of stumbling should come, but woe to him through whom they come!
It would be better for him if a millstone were hung around his neck, and he were thrown into the sea, rather than that he should cause one of these little ones to stumble.
Be careful. If your brother sins against you, rebuke him. If he repents, forgive him.
If he sins against you seven times in the day, and seven times returns, saying, 'I repent,' you shall forgive him.'
The apostles said to the Lord, 'Increase our faith.'
The Lord said, 'If you had faith like a grain of mustard seed, you would tell this sycamore tree, 'Be uprooted, and be planted in the sea,' and it would obey you.
But who is there among you, having a servant plowing or keeping sheep, that will say, when he comes in from the field, 'Come immediately and sit down at the table,'
and will not rather tell him, 'Prepare my supper, clothe yourself properly, and serve me, while I eat and drink. Afterward you shall eat and drink'?
Does he thank that servant because he did the things that were commanded? I think not.
Even so you also, when you have done all the things that are commanded you, say, 'We are unworthy servants. We have done our duty.''
It happened as he was on his way to Jerusalem, that he was passing along the borders of Samaria and Galilee.
As he entered into a certain village, ten men who were lepers met him, who stood at a distance.
They lifted up their voices, saying, 'Jesus, Master, have mercy on us!'
When he saw them, he said to them, 'Go and show yourselves to the priests.' It happened that as they went, they were cleansed.
One of them, when he saw that he was healed, turned back, glorifying God with a loud voice.
He fell on his face at Jesus' feet, giving him thanks; and he was a Samaritan.
Jesus answered, 'Weren't the ten cleansed? But where are the nine?
Were there none found who returned to give glory to God, except this stranger?'
Then he said to him, 'Get up, and go your way. Your faith has healed you.'
Being asked by the Pharisees when the Kingdom of God would come, he answered them, 'The Kingdom of God doesn't come with observation;
neither will they say, 'Look, here!' or, 'Look, there!' for behold, the Kingdom of God is within you.'
He said to the disciples, 'The days will come, when you will desire to see one of the days of the Son of Man, and you will not see it.
They will tell you, 'Look, here!' or 'Look, there!' Don't go away, nor follow after them,
for as the lightning, when it flashes out of the one part under the sky, shines to the other part under the sky; so will the Son of Man be in his day.
But first, he must suffer many things and be rejected by this generation.
As it happened in the days of Noah, even so will it be also in the days of the Son of Man.
They ate, they drank, they married, they were given in marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the ship, and the flood came, and destroyed them all.
Likewise, even as it happened in the days of Lot: they ate, they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they built;
but in the day that Lot went out from Sodom, it rained fire and sulfur from the sky, and destroyed them all.
It will be the same way in the day that the Son of Man is revealed.
In that day, he who will be on the housetop, and his goods in the house, let him not go down to take them away. Let him who is in the field likewise not turn back.
Remember Lot's wife!
Whoever seeks to save his life loses it, but whoever loses his life preserves it.
I tell you, in that night there will be two people in one bed. The one will be taken, and the other will be left.
There will be two grinding grain together. One will be taken, and the other will be left.'

They, answering, asked him, 'Where, Lord?' He said to them, 'Where the body is, there will the vultures also be gathered together.'
Since many have undertaken to set in order a narrative concerning those matters which have been fulfilled among us,
even as those who from the beginning were eyewitnesses and servants of the word delivered them to us,
it seemed good to me also, having traced the course of all things accurately from the first, to write to you in order, most excellent Theophilus;
that you might know the certainty concerning the things in which you were instructed.
There was in the days of Herod, the king of Judea, a certain priest named Zacharias, of the priestly division of Abijah. He had a wife of the daughters of Aaron, and her name was Elizabeth.
They were both righteous before God, walking blamelessly in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord.
But they had no child, because Elizabeth was barren, and they both were well advanced in years.
Now it happened, while he executed the priest's office before God in the order of his division,
according to the custom of the priest's office, his lot was to enter into the temple of the Lord and burn incense.
The whole multitude of the people were praying outside at the hour of incense.
An angel of the Lord appeared to him, standing on the right side of the altar of incense.
Zacharias was troubled when he saw him, and fear fell upon him.
But the angel said to him, 'Don't be afraid, Zacharias, because your request has been heard, and your wife, Elizabeth, will bear you a son, and you shall call his name John.
You will have joy and gladness; and many will rejoice at his birth.
For he will be great in the sight of the Lord, and he will drink no wine nor strong drink. He will be filled with the Holy Spirit, even from his mother's womb.
He will turn many of the children of Israel to the Lord, their God.
He will go before him in the spirit and power of Elijah, 'to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children,' and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just; to make ready a people prepared for the Lord.'
Zacharias said to the angel, 'How can I be sure of this? For I am an old man, and my wife is well advanced in years.'
The angel answered him, 'I am Gabriel, who stands in the presence of God. I was sent to speak to you, and to bring you this good news.
Behold, you will be silent and not able to speak, until the day that these things will happen, because you didn't believe my words, which will be fulfilled in their proper time.'
The people were waiting for Zacharias, and they marveled that he delayed in the temple.
When he came out, he could not speak to them, and they perceived that he had seen a vision in the temple. He continued making signs to them, and remained mute.
It happened, when the days of his service were fulfilled, he departed to his house.
After these days Elizabeth, his wife, conceived, and she hid herself five months, saying,
'Thus has the Lord done to me in the days in which he looked at me, to take away my reproach among men.'
Now in the sixth month, the angel Gabriel was sent from God to a city of Galilee, named Nazareth,
to a virgin pledged to be married to a man whose name was Joseph, of the house of David. The virgin's name was Mary.
Having come in, the angel said to her, 'Rejoice, you highly favored one! The Lord is with you. Blessed are you among women!'
But when she saw him, she was greatly troubled at the saying, and considered what kind of salutation this might be.
The angel said to her, 'Don't be afraid, Mary, for you have found favor with God.
Behold, you will conceive in your womb, and bring forth a son, and will call his name 'Jesus.'
He will be great, and will be called the Son of the Most High. The Lord God will give him the throne of his father, David,
and he will reign over the house of Jacob forever. There will be no end to his Kingdom.'
Mary said to the angel, 'How can this be, seeing I am a virgin?'
The angel answered her, 'The Holy Spirit will come on you, and the power of the Most High will overshadow you. Therefore also the holy one who is born from you will be called the Son of God.
Behold, Elizabeth, your relative, also has conceived a son in her old age; and this is the sixth month with her who was called barren.
For everything spoken by God is possible.'
Mary said, 'Behold, the handmaid of the Lord; be it to me according to your word.' The angel departed from her.
Mary arose in those days and went into the hill country with haste, into a city of Judah,
and entered into the house of Zacharias and greeted Elizabeth.
It happened, when Elizabeth heard Mary's greeting, that the baby leaped in her womb, and Elizabeth was filled with the Holy Spirit.
She called out with a loud voice, and said, 'Blessed are you among women, and blessed is the fruit of your womb!
Why am I so favored, that the mother of my Lord should come to me?
For behold, when the voice of your greeting came into my ears, the baby leaped in my womb for joy!
Blessed is she who believed, for there will be a fulfillment of the things which have been spoken to her from the Lord!'
Mary said, 'My soul magnifies the Lord.
My spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior,
for he has looked at the humble state of his handmaid. For behold, from now on, all generations will call me blessed.
For he who is mighty has done great things for me. Holy is his name.
His mercy is for generations of generations on those who fear him.
He has shown strength with his arm. He has scattered the proud in the imagination of their hearts.
He has put down princes from their thrones. And has exalted the lowly.
He has filled the hungry with good things. He has sent the rich away empty.
He has given help to Israel, his servant, that he might remember mercy,
As he spoke to our fathers, to Abraham and his seed forever.'
Mary stayed with her about three months, and then returned to her house.
Now the time that Elizabeth should give birth was fulfilled, and she brought forth a son.
Her neighbors and her relatives heard that the Lord had magnified his mercy towards her, and they rejoiced with her.
It happened on the eighth day, that they came to circumcise the child; and they would have called him Zacharias, after the name of the father.
His mother answered, 'Not so; but he will be called John.'
They said to her, 'There is no one among your relatives who is called by this name.'
They made signs to his father, what he would have him called.
He asked for a writing tablet, and wrote, 'His name is John.' They all marveled.
His mouth was opened immediately, and his tongue freed, and he spoke, blessing God.
Fear came on all who lived around them, and all these sayings were talked about throughout all the hill country of Judea.
All who heard them laid them up in their heart, saying, 'What then will this child be?' The hand of the Lord was with him.
His father, Zacharias, was filled with the Holy Spirit, and prophesied, saying,
'Blessed be the Lord, the God of Israel, for he has visited and worked redemption for his people;
and has raised up a horn of salvation for us in the house of his servant David
(as he spoke by the mouth of his holy prophets who have been from of old),
salvation from our enemies, and from the hand of all who hate us;
to show mercy towards our fathers, to remember his holy covenant,
the oath which he spoke to Abraham, our father,
to grant to us that we, being delivered out of the hand of our enemies, should serve him without fear,
In holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our life.
And you, child, will be called a prophet of the Most High, for you will go before the face of the Lord to make ready his ways,
to give knowledge of salvation to his people by the remission of their sins,
because of the tender mercy of our God, whereby the dawn from on high will visit us,
to shine on those who sit in darkness and the shadow of death; to guide our feet into the way of peace.'
The child was growing, and becoming strong in spirit, and was in the desert until the day of his public appearance to Israel.
Therefore when the Lord knew that the Pharisees had heard that Jesus was making and baptizing more disciples than John
(although Jesus himself didn't baptize, but his disciples),
he left Judea, and departed into Galilee.
He needed to pass through Samaria.
So he came to a city of Samaria, called Sychar, near the parcel of ground that Jacob gave to his son, Joseph.
Jacob's well was there. Jesus therefore, being tired from his journey, sat down by the well. It was about the sixth hour.
A woman of Samaria came to draw water. Jesus said to her, 'Give me a drink.'
For his disciples had gone away into the city to buy food.
The Samaritan woman therefore said to him, 'How is it that you, being a Jew, ask for a drink from me, a Samaritan woman?' (For Jews have no dealings with Samaritans.)
Jesus answered her, 'If you knew the gift of God, and who it is who says to you, 'Give me a drink,' you would have asked him, and he would have given you living water.'
The woman said to him, 'Sir, you have nothing to draw with, and the well is deep. From where then have you that living water?
Are you greater than our father, Jacob, who gave us the well, and drank of it himself, as did his children, and his livestock?'
Jesus answered her, 'Everyone who drinks of this water will thirst again,
but whoever drinks of the water that I will give him will never thirst again; but the water that I will give him will become in him a well of water springing up to eternal life.'
The woman said to him, 'Sir, give me this water, so that I don't get thirsty, neither come all the way here to draw.'
Jesus said to her, 'Go, call your husband, and come here.'
The woman answered, 'I have no husband.' Jesus said to her, 'You said well, 'I have no husband,'
for you have had five husbands; and he whom you now have is not your husband. This you have said truly.'
The woman said to him, 'Sir, I perceive that you are a prophet.
Our fathers worshiped in this mountain, and you Jews say that in Jerusalem is the place where people ought to worship.'
Jesus said to her, 'Woman, believe me, the hour comes, when neither in this mountain, nor in Jerusalem, will you worship the Father.
You worship that which you don't know. We worship that which we know; for salvation is from the Jews.
But the hour comes, and now is, when the true worshippers will worship the Father in spirit and truth, for the Father seeks such to be his worshippers.
God is spirit, and those who worship him must worship in spirit and truth.'
The woman said to him, 'I know that Messiah comes,' (he who is called Christ). 'When he has come, he will declare to us all things.'
Jesus said to her, 'I am he, the one who speaks to you.'
At this, his disciples came. They marveled that he was speaking with a woman; yet no one said, 'What are you looking for?' or, 'Why do you speak with her?'
So the woman left her water pot, and went away into the city, and said to the people,
'Come, see a man who told me everything that I did. Can this be the Christ?'
They went out of the city, and were coming to him.
In the meanwhile, the disciples urged him, saying, 'Rabbi, eat.'
But he said to them, 'I have food to eat that you don't know about.'
The disciples therefore said one to another, 'Has anyone brought him something to eat?'
Jesus said to them, 'My food is to do the will of him who sent me, and to accomplish his work.
Don't you say, 'There are yet four months until the harvest?' Behold, I tell you, lift up your eyes, and look at the fields, that they are white for harvest already.
He who reaps receives wages, and gathers fruit to eternal life; that both he who sows and he who reaps may rejoice together.
For in this the saying is true, 'One sows, and another reaps.'
I sent you to reap that for which you haven't labored. Others have labored, and you have entered into their labor.'
From that city many of the Samaritans believed in him because of the word of the woman, who testified, 'He told me everything that I did.'
So when the Samaritans came to him, they begged him to stay with them. He stayed there two days.
Many more believed because of his word.
They said to the woman, 'Now we believe, not because of your speaking; for we have heard for ourselves, and know that this is indeed the Christ, the Savior of the world.'
After the two days he went out from there and went into Galilee.
For Jesus himself testified that a prophet has no honor in his own country.
So when he came into Galilee, the Galileans received him, having seen all the things that he did in Jerusalem at the feast, for they also went to the feast.
Jesus came therefore again to Cana of Galilee, where he made the water into wine. There was a certain nobleman whose son was sick at Capernaum.
When he heard that Jesus had come out of Judea into Galilee, he went to him, and begged him that he would come down and heal his son, for he was at the point of death.
Jesus therefore said to him, 'Unless you see signs and wonders, you will in no way believe.'
The nobleman said to him, 'Sir, come down before my child dies.'
Jesus said to him, 'Go your way. Your son lives.' The man believed the word that Jesus spoke to him, and he went his way.
As he was now going down, his servants met him and reported, saying 'Your child lives!'
So he inquired of them the hour when he began to get better. They said therefore to him, 'Yesterday at the seventh hour, the fever left him.'
So the father knew that it was at that hour in which Jesus said to him, 'Your son lives.' He believed, as did his whole house.
This is again the second sign that Jesus did, having come out of Judea into Galilee.
Let as many as are bondservants under the yoke count their own masters worthy of all honor, that the name of God and the doctrine not be blasphemed.
Those who have believing masters, let them not despise them, because they are brothers, but rather let them serve them, because those who partake of the benefit are believing and beloved. Teach and exhort these things.
If anyone teaches a different doctrine, and doesn't consent to sound words, the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to godliness,
he is conceited, knowing nothing, but obsessed with arguments, disputes, and word battles, from which come envy, strife, reviling, evil suspicions,
constant friction of people of corrupt minds and destitute of the truth, who suppose that godliness is a means of gain. Withdraw yourself from such.
But godliness with contentment is great gain.
For we brought nothing into the world, and we certainly can't carry anything out.
But having food and clothing, we will be content with that.
But those who are determined to be rich fall into a temptation and a snare and many foolish and harmful lusts, such as drown men in ruin and destruction.
For the love of money is a root of all kinds of evil. Some have been led astray from the faith in their greed, and have pierced themselves through with many sorrows.
But you, man of God, flee these things, and follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience, and gentleness.
Fight the good fight of faith. Lay hold of the eternal life to which you were called, and you confessed the good confession in the sight of many witnesses.
I command you before God, who gives life to all things, and before Christ Jesus, who before Pontius Pilate testified the good confession,
that you keep the commandment without spot, blameless, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ;
which in its own times he will show, who is the blessed and only Ruler, the King of kings, and Lord of lords;
who alone has immortality, dwelling in unapproachable light; whom no man has seen, nor can see: to whom be honor and eternal power. Amen.
Charge those who are rich in this present world that they not be haughty, nor have their hope set on the uncertainty of riches, but on the living God, who richly provides us with everything to enjoy;
that they do good, that they be rich in good works, that they be ready to distribute, willing to communicate;
laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold of eternal life.
Timothy, guard that which is committed to you, turning away from the empty chatter and oppositions of the knowledge which is falsely so called;
which some professing have erred concerning the faith. Grace be with you. Amen.
Paul, a servant of God, and an apostle of Jesus Christ, according to the faith of God's chosen ones, and the knowledge of the truth which is according to godliness,
in hope of eternal life, which God, who can't lie, promised before time began;
but in his own time revealed his word in the message with which I was entrusted according to the commandment of God our Savior;
to Titus, my true child according to a common faith: Grace, mercy, and peace from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ our Savior.
I left you in Crete for this reason, that you would set in order the things that were lacking, and appoint elders in every city, as I directed you;
if anyone is blameless, the husband of one wife, having children who believe, who are not accused of loose or unruly behavior.
For the overseer must be blameless, as God's steward; not self-pleasing, not easily angered, not given to wine, not violent, not greedy for dishonest gain;
but given to hospitality, as a lover of good, sober minded, fair, holy, self-controlled;
holding to the faithful word which is according to the teaching, that he may be able to exhort in the sound doctrine, and to convict those who contradict him.
For there are also many unruly men, vain talkers and deceivers, especially those of the circumcision,
whose mouths must be stopped; men who overthrow whole houses, teaching things which they ought not, for dishonest gain's sake.
One of them, a prophet of their own, said, 'Cretans are always liars, evil beasts, and idle gluttons.'
This testimony is true. For this cause, reprove them sharply, that they may be sound in the faith,
not paying attention to Jewish fables and commandments of men who turn away from the truth.
To the pure, all things are pure; but to those who are defiled and unbelieving, nothing is pure; but both their mind and their conscience are defiled.
They profess that they know God, but by their works they deny him, being abominable, disobedient, and unfit for any good work.
Forasmuch then as Christ suffered for us in the flesh, arm yourselves also with the same mind; for he who has suffered in the flesh has ceased from sin;
that you no longer should live the rest of your time in the flesh for the lusts of men, but for the will of God.
For we have spent enough of our past time doing the desire of the Gentiles, and having walked in lewdness, lusts, drunken binges, orgies, carousings, and abominable idolatries.
They think it is strange that you don't run with them into the same excess of riot, blaspheming:
who will give account to him who is ready to judge the living and the dead.
For to this end the Good News was preached even to the dead, that they might be judged indeed as men in the flesh, but live as to God in the spirit.
But the end of all things is near. Therefore be of sound mind, self-controlled, and sober in prayer.
And above all things be earnest in your love among yourselves, for love covers a multitude of sins.
Be hospitable to one another without grumbling.
As each has received a gift, employ it in serving one another, as good managers of the grace of God in its various forms.
If anyone speaks, let it be as it were the very words of God. If anyone serves, let it be as of the strength which God supplies, that in all things God may be glorified through Jesus Christ, to whom belong the glory and the dominion forever and ever. Amen.
Beloved, don't be astonished at the fiery trial which has come upon you, to test you, as though a strange thing happened to you.
But because you are partakers of Christ's sufferings, rejoice; that at the revelation of his glory you also may rejoice with exceeding joy.
If you are insulted for the name of Christ, you are blessed; because the Spirit of glory and of God rests on you. On their part he is blasphemed, but on your part he is glorified.
For let none of you suffer as a murderer, or a thief, or an evil doer, or a meddler in other men's matters.
But if one of you suffers for being a Christian, let him not be ashamed; but let him glorify God in this matter.
For the time has come for judgment to begin with the household of God. If it begins first with us, what will happen to those who don't obey the Good News of God?
'If it is hard for the righteous to be saved, what will happen to the ungodly and the sinner?'
Therefore let them also who suffer according to the will of God in doing good entrust their souls to him, as to a faithful Creator.
For we know that if the earthly house of our tent is dissolved, we have a building from God, a house not made with hands, eternal, in the heavens.
For most certainly in this we groan, longing to be clothed with our habitation which is from heaven;
if so be that being clothed we will not be found naked.
For indeed we who are in this tent do groan, being burdened; not that we desire to be unclothed, but that we desire to be clothed, that what is mortal may be swallowed up by life.
Now he who made us for this very thing is God, who also gave to us the down payment of the Spirit.
Therefore, we are always confident and know that while we are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord;
for we walk by faith, not by sight.
We are of good courage, I say, and are willing rather to be absent from the body, and to be at home with the Lord.
Therefore also we make it our aim, whether at home or absent, to be well pleasing to him.
For we must all be revealed before the judgment seat of Christ; that each one may receive the things in the body, according to what he has done, whether good or bad.
Knowing therefore the fear of the Lord, we persuade men, but we are revealed to God; and I hope that we are revealed also in your consciences.
For we are not commending ourselves to you again, but speak as giving you occasion of boasting on our behalf, that you may have something to answer those who boast in appearance, and not in heart.
For if we are beside ourselves, it is for God. Or if we are of sober mind, it is for you.
For the love of Christ constrains us; because we judge thus, that one died for all, therefore all died.
He died for all, that those who live should no longer live to themselves, but to him who for their sakes died and rose again.
Therefore we know no one after the flesh from now on. Even though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now we know him so no more.
Therefore if anyone is in Christ, he is a new creation. The old things have passed away. Behold, all things have become new.
But all things are of God, who reconciled us to himself through Jesus Christ, and gave to us the ministry of reconciliation;
namely, that God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, not reckoning to them their trespasses, and having committed to us the word of reconciliation.
We are therefore ambassadors on behalf of Christ, as though God were entreating by us: we beg you on behalf of Christ, be reconciled to God.
For him who knew no sin he made to be sin on our behalf; so that in him we might become the righteousness of God.
He looked up, and saw the rich people who were putting their gifts into the treasury.
He saw a certain poor widow casting in two small brass coins.
He said, 'Truly I tell you, this poor widow put in more than all of them,
for all these put in gifts for God from their abundance, but she, out of her poverty, put in all that she had to live on.'
As some were talking about the temple and how it was decorated with beautiful stones and gifts, he said,
'As for these things which you see, the days will come, in which there will not be left here one stone on another that will not be thrown down.'
They asked him, 'Teacher, so when will these things be? What is the sign that these things are about to happen?'
He said, 'Watch out that you don't get led astray, for many will come in my name, saying, 'I am he,' and, 'The time is at hand.' Therefore don't follow them.
When you hear of wars and disturbances, don't be terrified, for these things must happen first, but the end won't come immediately.'
Then he said to them, 'Nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom.
There will be great earthquakes, famines, and plagues in various places. There will be terrors and great signs from heaven.
But before all these things, they will lay their hands on you and will persecute you, delivering you up to synagogues and prisons, bringing you before kings and governors for my name's sake.
It will turn out as a testimony for you.
Settle it therefore in your hearts not to meditate beforehand how to answer,
for I will give you a mouth and wisdom which all your adversaries will not be able to withstand or to contradict.
You will be handed over even by parents, brothers, relatives, and friends. They will cause some of you to be put to death.
You will be hated by all men for my name's sake.
And not a hair of your head will perish.
'By your endurance you will win your lives.
'But when you see Jerusalem surrounded by armies, then know that its desolation is at hand.
Then let those who are in Judea flee to the mountains. Let those who are in the midst of her depart. Let those who are in the country not enter therein.
For these are days of vengeance, that all things which are written may be fulfilled.
Woe to those who are pregnant and to those who nurse infants in those days! For there will be great distress in the land, and wrath to this people.
They will fall by the edge of the sword, and will be led captive into all the nations. Jerusalem will be trampled down by the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles are fulfilled.
There will be signs in the sun, moon, and stars; and on the earth anxiety of nations, in perplexity for the roaring of the sea and the waves;
men fainting for fear, and for expectation of the things which are coming on the world: for the powers of the heavens will be shaken.
Then they will see the Son of Man coming in a cloud with power and great glory.
But when these things begin to happen, look up, and lift up your heads, because your redemption is near.'
He told them a parable. 'See the fig tree, and all the trees.
When they are already budding, you see it and know by your own selves that the summer is already near.
Even so you also, when you see these things happening, know that the Kingdom of God is near.
Most certainly I tell you, this generation will not pass away until all things are accomplished.
Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will by no means pass away.
'So be careful, or your hearts will be loaded down with carousing, drunkenness, and cares of this life, and that day will come on you suddenly.
For it will come like a snare on all those who dwell on the surface of all the earth.
Therefore be watchful all the time, praying that you may be counted worthy to escape all these things that will happen, and to stand before the Son of Man.'
Every day Jesus was teaching in the temple, and every night he would go out and spend the night on the mountain that is called Olivet.
All the people came early in the morning to him in the temple to hear him.
Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus through the will of God, to the saints who are at Ephesus, and the faithful in Christ Jesus:
Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenly places in Christ;
even as he chose us in him before the foundation of the world, that we would be holy and without blemish before him in love;
having predestined us for adoption as children through Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his desire,
to the praise of the glory of his grace, by which he freely bestowed favor on us in the Beloved,
in whom we have our redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of our trespasses, according to the riches of his grace,
which he made to abound toward us in all wisdom and prudence,
making known to us the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure which he purposed in him
to an administration of the fullness of the times, to sum up all things in Christ, the things in the heavens, and the things on the earth, in him;
in whom also we were assigned an inheritance, having been foreordained according to the purpose of him who works all things after the counsel of his will;
to the end that we should be to the praise of his glory, we who had before hoped in Christ:
in whom you also, having heard the word of the truth, the Good News of your salvation,--in whom, having also believed, you were sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise,
who is a pledge of our inheritance, to the redemption of God's own possession, to the praise of his glory.
For this cause I also, having heard of the faith in the Lord Jesus which is among you, and the love which you have toward all the saints,
don't cease to give thanks for you, making mention of you in my prayers,
that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give to you a spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him;
having the eyes of your hearts enlightened, that you may know what is the hope of his calling, and what are the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints,
and what is the exceeding greatness of his power toward us who believe, according to that working of the strength of his might
which he worked in Christ, when he raised him from the dead, and made him to sit at his right hand in the heavenly places,
far above all rule, and authority, and power, and dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this age, but also in that which is to come.
He put all things in subjection under his feet, and gave him to be head over all things for the assembly,
which is his body, the fullness of him who fills all in all.
It happened that, while Apollos was at Corinth, Paul, having passed through the upper country, came to Ephesus, and found certain disciples.
He said to them, 'Did you receive the Holy Spirit when you believed?' They said to him, 'No, we haven't even heard that there is a Holy Spirit.'
He said, 'Into what then were you baptized?' They said, 'Into John's baptism.'
Paul said, 'John indeed baptized with the baptism of repentance, saying to the people that they should believe in the one who would come after him, that is, in Jesus.'
When they heard this, they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.
When Paul had laid his hands on them, the Holy Spirit came on them, and they spoke with other languages and prophesied.
They were about twelve men in all.
He entered into the synagogue, and spoke boldly for a period of three months, reasoning and persuading about the things concerning the Kingdom of God.
But when some were hardened and disobedient, speaking evil of the Way before the multitude, he departed from them, and separated the disciples, reasoning daily in the school of Tyrannus.
This continued for two years, so that all those who lived in Asia heard the word of the Lord Jesus, both Jews and Greeks.
God worked special miracles by the hands of Paul,
so that even handkerchiefs or aprons were carried away from his body to the sick, and the evil spirits went out.
But some of the itinerant Jews, exorcists, took on themselves to invoke over those who had the evil spirits the name of the Lord Jesus, saying, 'We adjure you by Jesus whom Paul preaches.'
There were seven sons of one Sceva, a Jewish chief priest, who did this.
The evil spirit answered, 'Jesus I know, and Paul I know, but who are you?'
The man in whom the evil spirit was leaped on them, and overpowered them, and prevailed against them, so that they fled out of that house naked and wounded.
This became known to all, both Jews and Greeks, who lived at Ephesus. Fear fell on them all, and the name of the Lord Jesus was magnified.
Many also of those who had believed came, confessing, and declaring their deeds.
Many of those who practiced magical arts brought their books together and burned them in the sight of all. They counted the price of them, and found it to be fifty thousand pieces of silver.
So the word of the Lord was growing and becoming mighty.
Now after these things had ended, Paul determined in the spirit, when he had passed through Macedonia and Achaia, to go to Jerusalem, saying, 'After I have been there, I must also see Rome.'
Having sent into Macedonia two of those who served him, Timothy and Erastus, he himself stayed in Asia for a while.
About that time there arose no small stir concerning the Way.
For a certain man named Demetrius, a silversmith, who made silver shrines of Artemis, brought no little business to the craftsmen,
whom he gathered together, with the workmen of like occupation, and said, 'Sirs, you know that by this business we have our wealth.
You see and hear, that not at Ephesus alone, but almost throughout all Asia, this Paul has persuaded and turned away many people, saying that they are no gods, that are made with hands.
Not only is there danger that this our trade come into disrepute, but also that the temple of the great goddess Artemis will be counted as nothing, and her majesty destroyed, whom all Asia and the world worships.'
When they heard this they were filled with anger, and cried out, saying, 'Great is Artemis of the Ephesians!'
The whole city was filled with confusion, and they rushed with one accord into the theater, having seized Gaius and Aristarchus, men of Macedonia, Paul's companions in travel.
When Paul wanted to enter in to the people, the disciples didn't allow him.
Certain also of the Asiarchs, being his friends, sent to him and begged him not to venture into the theater.
Some therefore cried one thing, and some another, for the assembly was in confusion. Most of them didn't know why they had come together.
They brought Alexander out of the multitude, the Jews putting him forward. Alexander beckoned with his hand, and would have made a defense to the people.
But when they perceived that he was a Jew, all with one voice for a time of about two hours cried out, 'Great is Artemis of the Ephesians!'
When the town clerk had quieted the multitude, he said, 'You men of Ephesus, what man is there who doesn't know that the city of the Ephesians is temple keeper of the great goddess Artemis, and of the image which fell down from Zeus?
Seeing then that these things can't be denied, you ought to be quiet, and to do nothing rash.
For you have brought these men here, who are neither robbers of temples nor blasphemers of your goddess.
If therefore Demetrius and the craftsmen who are with him have a matter against anyone, the courts are open, and there are proconsuls. Let them press charges against one another.
But if you seek anything about other matters, it will be settled in the regular assembly.
For indeed we are in danger of being accused concerning this day's riot, there being no cause. Concerning it, we wouldn't be able to give an account of this commotion.'
That which was from the beginning, that which we have heard, that which we have seen with our eyes, that which we saw, and our hands touched, concerning the Word of life
(and the life was revealed, and we have seen, and testify, and declare to you the life, the eternal life, which was with the Father, and was revealed to us);
that which we have seen and heard we declare to you, that you also may have fellowship with us. Yes, and our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son, Jesus Christ.
And we write these things to you, that our joy may be fulfilled.
This is the message which we have heard from him and announce to you, that God is light, and in him is no darkness at all.
If we say that we have fellowship with him and walk in the darkness, we lie, and don't tell the truth.
But if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship with one another, and the blood of Jesus Christ, his Son, cleanses us from all sin.
If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us.
If we confess our sins, he is faithful and righteous to forgive us the sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.
If we say that we haven't sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us.
Now accept one who is weak in faith, but not for disputes over opinions.
One man has faith to eat all things, but he who is weak eats only vegetables.
Don't let him who eats despise him who doesn't eat. Don't let him who doesn't eat judge him who eats, for God has accepted him.
Who are you who judge another's servant? To his own lord he stands or falls. Yes, he will be made to stand, for God has power to make him stand.
One man esteems one day as more important. Another esteems every day alike. Let each man be fully assured in his own mind.
He who observes the day, observes it to the Lord; and he who does not observe the day, to the Lord he does not observe it. He who eats, eats to the Lord, for he gives God thanks. He who doesn't eat, to the Lord he doesn't eat, and gives God thanks.
For none of us lives to himself, and none dies to himself.
For if we live, we live to the Lord. Or if we die, we die to the Lord. If therefore we live or die, we are the Lord's.
For to this end Christ died, rose, and lived again, that he might be Lord of both the dead and the living.
But you, why do you judge your brother? Or you again, why do you despise your brother? For we will all stand before the judgment seat of Christ.
For it is written, ''As I live,' says the Lord, 'to me every knee will bow. Every tongue will confess to God.''
So then each one of us will give account of himself to God.
Therefore let's not judge one another any more, but judge this rather, that no man put a stumbling block in his brother's way, or an occasion for falling.
I know, and am persuaded in the Lord Jesus, that nothing is unclean of itself; except that to him who considers anything to be unclean, to him it is unclean.
Yet if because of food your brother is grieved, you walk no longer in love. Don't destroy with your food him for whom Christ died.
Then don't let your good be slandered,
for the Kingdom of God is not eating and drinking, but righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit.
For he who serves Christ in these things is acceptable to God and approved by men.
So then, let us follow after things which make for peace, and things by which we may build one another up.
Don't overthrow God's work for food's sake. All things indeed are clean, however it is evil for that man who creates a stumbling block by eating.
It is good to not eat meat, drink wine, nor do anything by which your brother stumbles, is offended, or is made weak.
Do you have faith? Have it to yourself before God. Happy is he who doesn't judge himself in that which he approves.
But he who doubts is condemned if he eats, because it isn't of faith; and whatever is not of faith is sin. (14:24) Now to him who is able to establish you according to my Good News and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the mystery which has been kept secret through long ages, (14:25) but now is revealed, and by the Scriptures of the prophets, according to the commandment of the eternal God, is made known for obedience of faith to all the nations; (14:26) to the only wise God, through Jesus Christ, to whom be the glory forever! Amen.
The Pharisees and Sadducees came, and testing him, asked him to show them a sign from heaven.
But he answered them, 'When it is evening, you say, 'It will be fair weather, for the sky is red.'
In the morning, 'It will be foul weather today, for the sky is red and threatening.' Hypocrites! You know how to discern the appearance of the sky, but you can't discern the signs of the times!
An evil and adulterous generation seeks after a sign, and there will be no sign given to it, except the sign of the prophet Jonah.' He left them, and departed.
The disciples came to the other side and had forgotten to take bread.
Jesus said to them, 'Take heed and beware of the yeast of the Pharisees and Sadducees.'
They reasoned among themselves, saying, 'We brought no bread.'
Jesus, perceiving it, said, 'Why do you reason among yourselves, you of little faith, 'because you have brought no bread?'
Don't you yet perceive, neither remember the five loaves for the five thousand, and how many baskets you took up?
Nor the seven loaves for the four thousand, and how many baskets you took up?
How is it that you don't perceive that I didn't speak to you concerning bread? But beware of the yeast of the Pharisees and Sadducees.'
Then they understood that he didn't tell them to beware of the yeast of bread, but of the teaching of the Pharisees and Sadducees.
Now when Jesus came into the parts of Caesarea Philippi, he asked his disciples, saying, 'Who do men say that I, the Son of Man, am?'
They said, 'Some say John the Baptizer, some, Elijah, and others, Jeremiah, or one of the prophets.'
He said to them, 'But who do you say that I am?'
Simon Peter answered, 'You are the Christ, the Son of the living God.'
Jesus answered him, 'Blessed are you, Simon Bar Jonah, for flesh and blood has not revealed this to you, but my Father who is in heaven.
I also tell you that you are Peter, will not prevail against it.
I will give to you the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and whatever you bind on earth will have been bound in heaven; and whatever you release on earth will have been released in heaven.'
Then he commanded the disciples that they should tell no one that he is Jesus the Christ.
From that time, Jesus began to show his disciples that he must go to Jerusalem and suffer many things from the elders, chief priests, and scribes, and be killed, and the third day be raised up.
Peter took him aside, and began to rebuke him, saying, 'Far be it from you, Lord! This will never be done to you.'
But he turned, and said to Peter, 'Get behind me, Satan! You are a stumbling block to me, for you are not setting your mind on the things of God, but on the things of men.'
Then Jesus said to his disciples, 'If anyone desires to come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.
For whoever desires to save his life will lose it, and whoever will lose his life for my sake will find it.
For what will it profit a man, if he gains the whole world, and forfeits his life? Or what will a man give in exchange for his life?
For the Son of Man will come in the glory of his Father with his angels, and then he will render to everyone according to his deeds.
Most certainly I tell you, there are some standing here who will in no way taste of death, until they see the Son of Man coming in his Kingdom.'
Paul, looking steadfastly at the council, said, 'Brothers, I have lived before God in all good conscience until this day.'
The high priest, Ananias, commanded those who stood by him to strike him on the mouth.
Then Paul said to him, 'God will strike you, you whitewashed wall! Do you sit to judge me according to the law, and command me to be struck contrary to the law?'
Those who stood by said, 'Do you malign God's high priest?'
Paul said, 'I didn't know, brothers, that he was high priest. For it is written, 'You shall not speak evil of a ruler of your people.''
But when Paul perceived that the one part were Sadducees and the other Pharisees, he cried out in the council, 'Men and brothers, I am a Pharisee, a son of Pharisees. Concerning the hope and resurrection of the dead I am being judged!'
When he had said this, an argument arose between the Pharisees and Sadducees, and the assembly was divided.
For the Sadducees say that there is no resurrection, nor angel, nor spirit; but the Pharisees confess all of these.
A great clamor arose, and some of the scribes of the Pharisees part stood up, and contended, saying, 'We find no evil in this man. But if a spirit or angel has spoken to him, let's not fight against God!'
When a great argument arose, the commanding officer, fearing that Paul would be torn in pieces by them, commanded the soldiers to go down and take him by force from among them, and bring him into the barracks.
The following night, the Lord stood by him, and said, 'Cheer up, Paul, for as you have testified about me at Jerusalem, so you must testify also at Rome.'
When it was day, some of the Jews banded together, and bound themselves under a curse, saying that they would neither eat nor drink until they had killed Paul.
There were more than forty people who had made this conspiracy.
They came to the chief priests and the elders, and said, 'We have bound ourselves under a great curse, to taste nothing until we have killed Paul.
Now therefore, you with the council inform the commanding officer that he should bring him down to you tomorrow, as though you were going to judge his case more exactly. We are ready to kill him before he comes near.'
But Paul's sister's son heard of their lying in wait, and he came and entered into the barracks and told Paul.
Paul summoned one of the centurions, and said, 'Bring this young man to the commanding officer, for he has something to tell him.'
So he took him, and brought him to the commanding officer, and said, 'Paul, the prisoner, summoned me and asked me to bring this young man to you, who has something to tell you.'
The commanding officer took him by the hand, and going aside, asked him privately, 'What is it that you have to tell me?'
He said, 'The Jews have agreed to ask you to bring Paul down to the council tomorrow, as though intending to inquire somewhat more accurately concerning him.
Therefore don't yield to them, for more than forty men lie in wait for him, who have bound themselves under a curse neither to eat nor to drink until they have killed him. Now they are ready, looking for the promise from you.'
So the commanding officer let the young man go, charging him, 'Tell no one that you have revealed these things to me.'
He called to himself two of the centurions, and said, 'Prepare two hundred soldiers to go as far as Caesarea, with seventy horsemen, and two hundred men armed with spears, at the third hour of the night.'
He asked them to provide animals, that they might set Paul on one, and bring him safely to Felix the governor.
He wrote a letter like this:
'Claudius Lysias to the most excellent governor Felix: Greetings.
'This man was seized by the Jews, and was about to be killed by them, when I came with the soldiers and rescued him, having learned that he was a Roman.
Desiring to know the cause why they accused him, I brought him down to their council.
I found him to be accused about questions of their law, but not to be charged with anything worthy of death or of imprisonment.
When I was told that the Jews lay in wait for the man, I sent him to you immediately, charging his accusers also to bring their accusations against him before you. Farewell.'
So the soldiers, carrying out their orders, took Paul and brought him by night to Antipatris.
But on the next day they left the horsemen to go with him, and returned to the barracks.
When they came to Caesarea and delivered the letter to the governor, they also presented Paul to him.
When the governor had read it, he asked what province he was from. When he understood that he was from Cilicia, he said,
'I will hear you fully when your accusers also arrive.' He commanded that he be kept in Herod's palace.
Therefore you are without excuse, O man, whoever you are who judge. For in that which you judge another, you condemn yourself. For you who judge practice the same things.
We know that the judgment of God is according to truth against those who practice such things.
Do you think this, O man who judges those who practice such things, and do the same, that you will escape the judgment of God?
Or do you despise the riches of his goodness, forbearance, and patience, not knowing that the goodness of God leads you to repentance?
But according to your hardness and unrepentant heart you are treasuring up for yourself wrath in the day of wrath, revelation, and of the righteous judgment of God;
who 'will pay back to everyone according to their works:'
to those who by patience in well-doing seek for glory, honor, and incorruptibility, eternal life;
but to those who are self-seeking, and don't obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness, will be wrath and indignation,
oppression and anguish, on every soul of man who works evil, to the Jew first, and also to the Greek.
But glory, honor, and peace go to every man who works good, to the Jew first, and also to the Greek.
For there is no partiality with God.
For as many as have sinned without law will also perish without the law. As many as have sinned under the law will be judged by the law.
For it isn't the hearers of the law who are righteous before God, but the doers of the law will be justified
(for when Gentiles who don't have the law do by nature the things of the law, these, not having the law, are a law to themselves,
in that they show the work of the law written in their hearts, their conscience testifying with them, and their thoughts among themselves accusing or else excusing them)
in the day when God will judge the secrets of men, according to my Good News, by Jesus Christ.
Indeed you bear the name of a Jew, and rest on the law, and glory in God,
and know his will, and approve the things that are excellent, being instructed out of the law,
and are confident that you yourself are a guide of the blind, a light to those who are in darkness,
a corrector of the foolish, a teacher of babies, having in the law the form of knowledge and of the truth.
You therefore who teach another, don't you teach yourself? You who preach that a man shouldn't steal, do you steal?
You who say a man shouldn't commit adultery. Do you commit adultery? You who abhor idols, do you rob temples?
You who glory in the law, through your disobedience of the law do you dishonor God?
For 'the name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles because of you,' just as it is written.
For circumcision indeed profits, if you are a doer of the law, but if you are a transgressor of the law, your circumcision has become uncircumcision.
If therefore the uncircumcised keep the ordinances of the law, won't his uncircumcision be accounted as circumcision?
Won't the uncircumcision which is by nature, if it fulfills the law, judge you, who with the letter and circumcision are a transgressor of the law?
For he is not a Jew who is one outwardly, neither is that circumcision which is outward in the flesh;
but he is a Jew who is one inwardly, and circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit not in the letter; whose praise is not from men, but from God.
Paul, a prisoner of Christ Jesus, and Timothy our brother, to Philemon, our beloved fellow worker,
to the beloved Apphia, to Archippus, our fellow soldier, and to the assembly in your house:
Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
I thank my God always, making mention of you in my prayers,
hearing of your love, and of the faith which you have toward the Lord Jesus, and toward all the saints;
that the fellowship of your faith may become effective, in the knowledge of every good thing which is in us in Christ Jesus.
For we have much joy and comfort in your love, because the hearts of the saints have been refreshed through you, brother.
Therefore, though I have all boldness in Christ to command you that which is appropriate,
yet for love's sake I rather beg, being such a one as Paul, the aged, but also a prisoner of Jesus Christ.
I beg you for my child, whom I have become the father of in my chains, Onesimus,
who once was useless to you, but now is useful to you and to me.
I am sending him back. Therefore receive him, that is, my own heart,
whom I desired to keep with me, that on your behalf he might serve me in my chains for the Good News.
But I was willing to do nothing without your consent, that your goodness would not be as of necessity, but of free will.
For perhaps he was therefore separated from you for a while, that you would have him forever,
no longer as a slave, but more than a slave, a beloved brother, especially to me, but how much rather to you, both in the flesh and in the Lord.
If then you count me a partner, receive him as you would receive me.
But if he has wronged you at all, or owes you anything, put that to my account.
I, Paul, write this with my own hand: I will repay it (not to mention to you that you owe to me even your own self besides).
Yes, brother, let me have joy from you in the Lord. Refresh my heart in the Lord.
Having confidence in your obedience, I write to you, knowing that you will do even beyond what I say.
Also, prepare a guest room for me, for I hope that through your prayers I will be restored to you.
Epaphras, my fellow prisoner in Christ Jesus, greets you,
as do Mark, Aristarchus, Demas, and Luke, my fellow workers.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit. Amen.
It is indeed unnecessary for me to write to you concerning the service to the saints,
for I know your readiness, of which I boast on your behalf to them of Macedonia, that Achaia has been prepared for a year past. Your zeal has stirred up very many of them.
But I have sent the brothers that our boasting on your behalf may not be in vain in this respect, that, just as I said, you may be prepared,
so that I won't by any means, if there come with me any of Macedonia and find you unprepared, we (to say nothing of you) should be disappointed in this confident boasting.
I thought it necessary therefore to entreat the brothers that they would go before to you, and arrange ahead of time the generous gift that you promised before, that the same might be ready as a matter of generosity, and not of greediness.
Remember this: he who sows sparingly will also reap sparingly. He who sows bountifully will also reap bountifully.
Let each man give according as he has determined in his heart; not grudgingly, or under compulsion; for God loves a cheerful giver.
And God is able to make all grace abound to you, that you, always having all sufficiency in everything, may abound to every good work.
As it is written, 'He has scattered abroad, he has given to the poor. His righteousness remains forever.'
Now may he who supplies seed to the sower and bread for food, supply and multiply your seed for sowing, and increase the fruits of your righteousness;
you being enriched in everything to all liberality, which works through us thanksgiving to God.
For this service of giving that you perform not only makes up for lack among the saints, but abounds also through many givings of thanks to God;
seeing that through the proof given by this service, they glorify God for the obedience of your confession to the Good News of Christ, and for the liberality of your contribution to them and to all;
while they themselves also, with supplication on your behalf, yearn for you by reason of the exceeding grace of God in you.
Now thanks be to God for his unspeakable gift!
I heard a loud voice out of the temple, saying to the seven angels, 'Go and pour out the seven bowls of the wrath of God on the earth!'
The first went, and poured out his bowl into the earth, and it became a harmful and evil sore on the people who had the mark of the beast, and who worshiped his image.
The second angel poured out his bowl into the sea, and it became blood as of a dead man. Every living thing in the sea died.
The third poured out his bowl into the rivers and springs of water, and they became blood.
I heard the angel of the waters saying, 'You are righteous, who are and who were, you Holy One, because you have judged these things.
For they poured out the blood of the saints and the prophets, and you have given them blood to drink. They deserve this.'
I heard the altar saying, 'Yes, Lord God, the Almighty, true and righteous are your judgments.'
The fourth poured out his bowl on the sun, and it was given to him to scorch men with fire.
People were scorched with great heat, and people blasphemed the name of God who has the power over these plagues. They didn't repent and give him glory.
The fifth poured out his bowl on the throne of the beast, and his kingdom was darkened. They gnawed their tongues because of the pain,
and they blasphemed the God of heaven because of their pains and their sores. They didn't repent of their works.
The sixth poured out his bowl on the great river, the Euphrates. Its water was dried up, that the way might be made ready for the kings that come from the sunrise.
I saw coming out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet, three unclean spirits, something like frogs;
for they are spirits of demons, performing signs; which go forth to the kings of the whole inhabited earth, to gather them together for the war of that great day of God, the Almighty.
'Behold, I come like a thief. Blessed is he who watches, and keeps his clothes, so that he doesn't walk naked, and they see his shame.'
He gathered them together into the place which is called in Hebrew, Megiddo.
The seventh poured out his bowl into the air. A loud voice came forth out of the temple of heaven, from the throne, saying, 'It is done!'
There were lightnings, sounds, and thunders; and there was a great earthquake, such as was not since there were men on the earth, so great an earthquake, so mighty.
The great city was divided into three parts, and the cities of the nations fell. Babylon the great was remembered in the sight of God, to give to her the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his wrath.
Every island fled away, and the mountains were not found.
Great hailstones, about the weight of a talent, came down out of the sky on people. People blasphemed God because of the plague of the hail, for this plague is exceedingly severe.
You therefore, my child, be strengthened in the grace that is in Christ Jesus.
The things which you have heard from me among many witnesses, commit the same to faithful men, who will be able to teach others also.
You therefore must endure hardship, as a good soldier of Christ Jesus.
No soldier on duty entangles himself in the affairs of life, that he may please him who enrolled him as a soldier.
Also, if anyone competes in athletics, he isn't crowned unless he has competed by the rules.
The farmers who labor must be the first to get a share of the crops.
Consider what I say, and may the Lord give you understanding in all things.
Remember Jesus Christ, risen from the dead, of the seed of David, according to my Good News,
in which I suffer hardship to the point of chains as a criminal. But God's word isn't chained.
Therefore I endure all things for the chosen ones' sake, that they also may obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory.
This saying is faithful: 'For if we died with him, we will also live with him.
If we endure, we will also reign with him. If we deny him, he also will deny us.
If we are faithless, he remains faithful. He can't deny himself.'
Remind them of these things, charging them in the sight of the Lord, that they don't argue about words, to no profit, to the subverting of those who hear.
Give diligence to present yourself approved by God, a workman who doesn't need to be ashamed, properly handling the Word of Truth.
But shun empty chatter, for they will proceed further in ungodliness,
and their word will consume like gangrene, of whom is Hymenaeus and Philetus;
men who have erred concerning the truth, saying that the resurrection is already past, and overthrowing the faith of some.
However God's firm foundation stands, having this seal, 'The Lord knows those who are his,' depart from unrighteousness.'
Now in a large house there are not only vessels of gold and of silver, but also of wood and of clay. Some are for honor, and some for dishonor.
If anyone therefore purges himself from these, he will be a vessel for honor, sanctified, and suitable for the master's use, prepared for every good work.
Flee from youthful lusts; but pursue righteousness, faith, love, and peace with those who call on the Lord out of a pure heart.
But refuse foolish and ignorant questionings, knowing that they generate strife.
The Lord's servant must not quarrel, but be gentle towards all, able to teach, patient,
in gentleness correcting those who oppose him: perhaps God may give them repentance leading to a full knowledge of the truth,
and they may recover themselves out of the devil's snare, having been taken captive by him to his will.
Now the feast of unleavened bread, which is called the Passover, drew near.
The chief priests and the scribes sought how they might put him to death, for they feared the people.
Satan entered into Judas, who was surnamed Iscariot, who was numbered with the twelve.
He went away, and talked with the chief priests and captains about how he might deliver him to them.
They were glad, and agreed to give him money.
He consented, and sought an opportunity to deliver him to them in the absence of the multitude.
The day of unleavened bread came, on which the Passover must be sacrificed.
He sent Peter and John, saying, 'Go and prepare the Passover for us, that we may eat.'
They said to him, 'Where do you want us to prepare?'
He said to them, 'Behold, when you have entered into the city, a man carrying a pitcher of water will meet you. Follow him into the house which he enters.
Tell the master of the house, 'The Teacher says to you, 'Where is the guest room, where I may eat the Passover with my disciples?''
He will show you a large, furnished upper room. Make preparations there.'
They went, found things as he had told them, and they prepared the Passover.
When the hour had come, he sat down with the twelve apostles.
He said to them, 'I have earnestly desired to eat this Passover with you before I suffer,
for I tell you, I will no longer by any means eat of it until it is fulfilled in the Kingdom of God.'
He received a cup, and when he had given thanks, he said, 'Take this, and share it among yourselves,
for I tell you, I will not drink at all again from the fruit of the vine, until the Kingdom of God comes.'
He took bread, and when he had given thanks, he broke it, and gave to them, saying, 'This is my body which is given for you. Do this in memory of me.'
Likewise, he took the cup after supper, saying, 'This cup is the new covenant in my blood, which is poured out for you.
But behold, the hand of him who betrays me is with me on the table.
The Son of Man indeed goes, as it has been determined, but woe to that man through whom he is betrayed!'
They began to question among themselves, which of them it was who would do this thing.
There arose also a contention among them, which of them was considered to be greatest.
He said to them, 'The kings of the nations lord it over them, and those who have authority over them are called 'benefactors.'
But not so with you. But one who is the greater among you, let him become as the younger, and one who is governing, as one who serves.
For who is greater, one who sits at the table, or one who serves? Isn't it he who sits at the table? But I am in the midst of you as one who serves.
But you are those who have continued with me in my trials.
I confer on you a kingdom, even as my Father conferred on me,
that you may eat and drink at my table in my Kingdom. You will sit on thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.'
The Lord said, 'Simon, Simon, behold, Satan asked to have you, that he might sift you as wheat,
but I prayed for you, that your faith wouldn't fail. You, when once you have turned again, establish your brothers.'
He said to him, 'Lord, I am ready to go with you both to prison and to death!'
He said, 'I tell you, Peter, the rooster will by no means crow today until you deny that you know me three times.'
He said to them, 'When I sent you out without purse, and wallet, and shoes, did you lack anything?' They said, 'Nothing.'
Then he said to them, 'But now, whoever has a purse, let him take it, and likewise a wallet. Whoever has none, let him sell his cloak, and buy a sword.
For I tell you that this which is written must still be fulfilled in me: 'He was counted with the lawless.' For that which concerns me has an end.'
They said, 'Lord, behold, here are two swords.' He said to them, 'That is enough.'
He came out, and went, as his custom was, to the Mount of Olives. His disciples also followed him.
When he was at the place, he said to them, 'Pray that you don't enter into temptation.'
He was withdrawn from them about a stone's throw, and he knelt down and prayed,
saying, 'Father, if you are willing, remove this cup from me. Nevertheless, not my will, but yours, be done.'
An angel from heaven appeared to him, strengthening him.
Being in agony he prayed more earnestly. His sweat became like great drops of blood falling down on the ground.
When he rose up from his prayer, he came to the disciples, and found them sleeping because of grief,
and said to them, 'Why do you sleep? Rise and pray that you may not enter into temptation.'
While he was still speaking, behold, a multitude, and he who was called Judas, one of the twelve, was leading them. He came near to Jesus to kiss him.
But Jesus said to him, 'Judas, do you betray the Son of Man with a kiss?'
When those who were around him saw what was about to happen, they said to him, 'Lord, shall we strike with the sword?'
A certain one of them struck the servant of the high priest, and cut off his right ear.
But Jesus answered, 'Let me at least do this'--and he touched his ear, and healed him.
Jesus said to the chief priests, captains of the temple, and elders, who had come against him, 'Have you come out as against a robber, with swords and clubs?
When I was with you in the temple daily, you didn't stretch out your hands against me. But this is your hour, and the power of darkness.'
They seized him, and led him away, and brought him into the high priest's house. But Peter followed from a distance.
When they had kindled a fire in the middle of the courtyard, and had sat down together, Peter sat among them.
A certain servant girl saw him as he sat in the light, and looking intently at him, said, 'This man also was with him.'
He denied Jesus, saying, 'Woman, I don't know him.'
After a little while someone else saw him, and said, 'You also are one of them!' But Peter answered, 'Man, I am not!'
After about one hour passed, another confidently affirmed, saying, 'Truly this man also was with him, for he is a Galilean!'
But Peter said, 'Man, I don't know what you are talking about!' Immediately, while he was still speaking, a rooster crowed.
The Lord turned, and looked at Peter. Then Peter remembered the Lord's word, how he said to him, 'Before the rooster crows you will deny me three times.'
He went out, and wept bitterly.
The men who held Jesus mocked him and beat him.
Having blindfolded him, they struck him on the face and asked him, 'Prophesy! Who is the one who struck you?'
They spoke many other things against him, insulting him.
As soon as it was day, the assembly of the elders of the people was gathered together, both chief priests and scribes, and they led him away into their council, saying,
'If you are the Christ, tell us.' But he said to them, 'If I tell you, you won't believe,
and if I ask, you will in no way answer me or let me go.
From now on, the Son of Man will be seated at the right hand of the power of God.'
They all said, 'Are you then the Son of God?' He said to them, 'You say it, because I am.'
They said, 'Why do we need any more witness? For we ourselves have heard from his own mouth!'
You were made alive when you were dead in transgressions and sins,
in which you once walked according to the course of this world, according to the prince of the power of the air, the spirit who now works in the children of disobedience;
among whom we also all once lived in the lust of our flesh, doing the desires of the flesh and of the mind, and were by nature children of wrath, even as the rest.
But God, being rich in mercy, for his great love with which he loved us,
even when we were dead through our trespasses, made us alive together with Christ (by grace you have been saved),
and raised us up with him, and made us to sit with him in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus,
that in the ages to come he might show the exceeding riches of his grace in kindness toward us in Christ Jesus;
for by grace you have been saved through faith, and that not of yourselves; it is the gift of God,
not of works, that no one would boast.
For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus for good works, which God prepared before that we would walk in them.
Therefore remember that once you, the Gentiles in the flesh, who are called 'uncircumcision' by that which is called 'circumcision,' (in the flesh, made by hands);
that you were at that time separate from Christ, alienated from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenants of the promise, having no hope and without God in the world.
But now in Christ Jesus you who once were far off are made near in the blood of Christ.
For he is our peace, who made both one, and broke down the middle wall of partition,
having abolished in the flesh the hostility, the law of commandments contained in ordinances, that he might create in himself one new man of the two, making peace;
and might reconcile them both in one body to God through the cross, having killed the hostility thereby.
He came and preached peace to you who were far off and to those who were near.
For through him we both have our access in one Spirit to the Father.
So then you are no longer strangers and foreigners, but you are fellow citizens with the saints, and of the household of God,
being built on the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Christ Jesus himself being the chief cornerstone;
in whom the whole building, fitted together, grows into a holy temple in the Lord;
in whom you also are built together for a habitation of God in the Spirit.
My little children, I write these things to you so that you may not sin. If anyone sins, we have a Counselor with the Father, Jesus Christ, the righteous.
And he is the atoning sacrifice for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the whole world.
This is how we know that we know him: if we keep his commandments.
One who says, 'I know him,' and doesn't keep his commandments, is a liar, and the truth isn't in him.
But whoever keeps his word, God's love has most certainly been perfected in him. This is how we know that we are in him:
he who says he remains in him ought himself also to walk just like he walked.
Brothers, I write no new commandment to you, but an old commandment which you had from the beginning. The old commandment is the word which you heard from the beginning.
Again, I write a new commandment to you, which is true in him and in you; because the darkness is passing away, and the true light already shines.
He who says he is in the light and hates his brother, is in the darkness even until now.
He who loves his brother remains in the light, and there is no occasion for stumbling in him.
But he who hates his brother is in the darkness, and walks in the darkness, and doesn't know where he is going, because the darkness has blinded his eyes.
I write to you, little children, because your sins are forgiven you for his name's sake.
I write to you, fathers, because you know him who is from the beginning. I write to you, young men, because you have overcome the evil one. I write to you, little children, because you know the Father.
I have written to you, fathers, because you know him who is from the beginning. I have written to you, young men, because you are strong, and the word of God remains in you, and you have overcome the evil one.
Don't love the world, neither the things that are in the world. If anyone loves the world, the Father's love isn't in him.
For all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, isn't the Father's, but is the world's.
The world is passing away with its lusts, but he who does God's will remains forever.
Little children, these are the end times, and as you heard that the Antichrist is coming, even now many antichrists have arisen. By this we know that it is the final hour.
They went out from us, but they didn't belong to us; for if they had belonged to us, they would have continued with us. But they left, that they might be revealed that none of them belong to us.
You have an anointing from the Holy One, and you all have knowledge.
I have not written to you because you don't know the truth, but because you know it, and because no lie is of the truth.
Who is the liar but he who denies that Jesus is the Christ? This is the Antichrist, he who denies the Father and the Son.
Whoever denies the Son, the same doesn't have the Father. He who confesses the Son has the Father also.
Therefore, as for you, let that remain in you which you heard from the beginning. If that which you heard from the beginning remains in you, you also will remain in the Son, and in the Father.
This is the promise which he promised us, the eternal life.
These things I have written to you concerning those who would lead you astray.
As for you, the anointing which you received from him remains in you, and you don't need for anyone to teach you. But as his anointing teaches you concerning all things, and is true, and is no lie, and even as it taught you, you will remain in him.
Now, little children, remain in him, that when he appears, we may have boldness, and not be ashamed before him at his coming.
If you know that he is righteous, you know that everyone who practices righteousness is born of him.
'And to the angel of the assembly in Sardis write: 'He who has the seven Spirits of God, and the seven stars says these things: 'I know your works, that you have a reputation of being alive, but you are dead.
Wake up, and keep the things that remain, which you were about to throw away, for I have found no works of yours perfected before my God.
Remember therefore how you have received and heard. Keep it, and repent. If therefore you won't watch, I will come as a thief, and you won't know what hour I will come upon you.
Nevertheless you have a few names in Sardis that did not defile their garments. They will walk with me in white, for they are worthy.
He who overcomes will be arrayed in white garments, and I will in no way blot his name out of the book of life, and I will confess his name before my Father, and before his angels.
He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies.
'To the angel of the assembly in Philadelphia write: 'He who is holy, he who is true, he who has the key of David, he who opens and no one can shut, and who shuts and no one opens, says these things:
'I know your works (behold, I have set before you an open door, which no one can shut), that you have a little power, and kept my word, and didn't deny my name.
Behold, I give of the synagogue of Satan, of those who say they are Jews, and they are not, but lie. Behold, I will make them to come and worship before your feet, and to know that I have loved you.
Because you kept my command to endure, I also will keep you from the hour of testing, which is to come on the whole world, to test those who dwell on the earth.
I am coming quickly! Hold firmly that which you have, so that no one takes your crown.
He who overcomes, I will make him a pillar in the temple of my God, and he will go out from there no more. I will write on him the name of my God, and the name of the city of my God, the new Jerusalem, which comes down out of heaven from my God, and my own new name.
He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies.
'To the angel of the assembly in Laodicea write: 'The Amen, the Faithful and True Witness, the Head of God's creation, says these things:
'I know your works, that you are neither cold nor hot. I wish you were cold or hot.
So, because you are lukewarm, and neither hot nor cold, I will vomit you out of my mouth.
Because you say, 'I am rich, and have gotten riches, and have need of nothing;' and don't know that you are the wretched one, miserable, poor, blind, and naked;
I counsel you to buy from me gold refined by fire, that you may become rich; and white garments, that you may clothe yourself, and that the shame of your nakedness may not be revealed; and eye salve to anoint your eyes, that you may see.
As many as I love, I reprove and chasten. Be zealous therefore, and repent.
Behold, I stand at the door and knock. If anyone hears my voice and opens the door, then I will come in to him, and will dine with him, and he with me.
He who overcomes, I will give to him to sit down with me on my throne, as I also overcame, and sat down with my Father on his throne.
He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies.'
Then Pharisees and scribes came to Jesus from Jerusalem, saying,
'Why do your disciples disobey the tradition of the elders? For they don't wash their hands when they eat bread.'
He answered them, 'Why do you also disobey the commandment of God because of your tradition?
For God commanded, 'Honor your father and your mother,'
But you say, 'Whoever may tell his father or his mother, 'Whatever help you might otherwise have gotten from me is a gift devoted to God,'
he shall not honor his father or mother.' You have made the commandment of God void because of your tradition.
You hypocrites! Well did Isaiah prophesy of you, saying,
'These people draw near to me with their mouth, and honor me with their lips; but their heart is far from me.
And in vain do they worship me, teaching as doctrine rules made by men.''
He summoned the multitude, and said to them, 'Hear, and understand.
That which enters into the mouth doesn't defile the man; but that which proceeds out of the mouth, this defiles the man.'
Then the disciples came, and said to him, 'Do you know that the Pharisees were offended, when they heard this saying?'
But he answered, 'Every plant which my heavenly Father didn't plant will be uprooted.
Leave them alone. They are blind guides of the blind. If the blind guide the blind, both will fall into a pit.'
Peter answered him, 'Explain the parable to us.'
So Jesus said, 'Do you also still not understand?
Don't you understand that whatever goes into the mouth passes into the belly, and then out of the body?
But the things which proceed out of the mouth come out of the heart, and they defile the man.
For out of the heart come forth evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, sexual sins, thefts, false testimony, and blasphemies.
These are the things which defile the man; but to eat with unwashed hands doesn't defile the man.'
Jesus went out from there, and withdrew into the region of Tyre and Sidon.
Behold, a Canaanite woman came out from those borders, and cried, saying, 'Have mercy on me, Lord, you son of David! My daughter is severely demonized!'
But he answered her not a word. His disciples came and begged him, saying, 'Send her away; for she cries after us.'
But he answered, 'I wasn't sent to anyone but the lost sheep of the house of Israel.'
But she came and worshiped him, saying, 'Lord, help me.'
But he answered, 'It is not appropriate to take the children's bread and throw it to the dogs.'
But she said, 'Yes, Lord, but even the dogs eat the crumbs which fall from their masters' table.'
Then Jesus answered her, 'Woman, great is your faith! Be it done to you even as you desire.' And her daughter was healed from that hour.
Jesus departed there, and came near to the sea of Galilee; and he went up into the mountain, and sat there.
Great multitudes came to him, having with them the lame, blind, mute, maimed, and many others, and they put them down at his feet. He healed them,
so that the multitude wondered when they saw the mute speaking, injured whole, lame walking, and blind seeing--and they glorified the God of Israel.
Jesus summoned his disciples and said, 'I have compassion on the multitude, because they continue with me now three days and have nothing to eat. I don't want to send them away fasting, or they might faint on the way.'
The disciples said to him, 'Where should we get so many loaves in a deserted place as to satisfy so great a multitude?'
Jesus said to them, 'How many loaves do you have?' They said, 'Seven, and a few small fish.'
He commanded the multitude to sit down on the ground;
and he took the seven loaves and the fish. He gave thanks and broke them, and gave to the disciples, and the disciples to the multitudes.
They all ate, and were filled. They took up seven baskets full of the broken pieces that were left over.
Those who ate were four thousand men, besides women and children.
Then he sent away the multitudes, got into the boat, and came into the borders of Magdala.
He also spoke a parable to them that they must always pray, and not give up,
saying, 'There was a judge in a certain city who didn't fear God, and didn't respect man.
A widow was in that city, and she often came to him, saying, 'Defend me from my adversary!'
He wouldn't for a while, but afterward he said to himself, 'Though I neither fear God, nor respect man,
yet because this widow bothers me, I will defend her, or else she will wear me out by her continual coming.''
The Lord said, 'Listen to what the unrighteous judge says.
Won't God avenge his chosen ones, who are crying out to him day and night, and yet he exercises patience with them?
I tell you that he will avenge them quickly. Nevertheless, when the Son of Man comes, will he find faith on the earth?'
He spoke also this parable to certain people who were convinced of their own righteousness, and who despised all others.
'Two men went up into the temple to pray; one was a Pharisee, and the other was a tax collector.
The Pharisee stood and prayed to himself like this: 'God, I thank you, that I am not like the rest of men, extortioners, unrighteous, adulterers, or even like this tax collector.
I fast twice a week. I give tithes of all that I get.'
But the tax collector, standing far away, wouldn't even lift up his eyes to heaven, but beat his breast, saying, 'God, be merciful to me, a sinner!'
I tell you, this man went down to his house justified rather than the other; for everyone who exalts himself will be humbled, but he who humbles himself will be exalted.'
They were also bringing their babies to him, that he might touch them. But when the disciples saw it, they rebuked them.
Jesus summoned them, saying, 'Allow the little children to come to me, and don't hinder them, for the Kingdom of God belongs to such as these.
Most certainly, I tell you, whoever doesn't receive the Kingdom of God like a little child, he will in no way enter into it.'
A certain ruler asked him, saying, 'Good Teacher, what shall I do to inherit eternal life?'
Jesus asked him, 'Why do you call me good? No one is good, except one--God.
You know the commandments: 'Don't commit adultery,' 'Don't murder,' 'Don't steal,' 'Don't give false testimony,' 'Honor your father and your mother.''
He said, 'I have observed all these things from my youth up.'
When Jesus heard these things, he said to him, 'You still lack one thing. Sell all that you have, and distribute it to the poor. You will have treasure in heaven. Come, follow me.'
But when he heard these things, he became very sad, for he was very rich.
Jesus, seeing that he became very sad, said, 'How hard it is for those who have riches to enter into the Kingdom of God!
For it is easier for a camel to enter in through a needle's eye, than for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of God.'
Those who heard it said, 'Then who can be saved?'
But he said, 'The things which are impossible with men are possible with God.'
Peter said, 'Look, we have left everything, and followed you.'
He said to them, 'Most certainly I tell you, there is no one who has left house, or wife, or brothers, or parents, or children, for the Kingdom of God's sake,
who will not receive many times more in this time, and in the world to come, eternal life.'
He took the twelve aside, and said to them, 'Behold, we are going up to Jerusalem, and all the things that are written through the prophets concerning the Son of Man will be completed.
For he will be delivered up to the Gentiles, will be mocked, treated shamefully, and spit on.
They will scourge and kill him. On the third day, he will rise again.'
They understood none of these things. This saying was hidden from them, and they didn't understand the things that were said.
It happened, as he came near Jericho, a certain blind man sat by the road, begging.
Hearing a multitude going by, he asked what this meant.
They told him that Jesus of Nazareth was passing by.
He cried out, 'Jesus, you son of David, have mercy on me!'
Those who led the way rebuked him, that he should be quiet; but he cried out all the more, 'You son of David, have mercy on me!'
Standing still, Jesus commanded him to be brought to him. When he had come near, he asked him,
'What do you want me to do?' He said, 'Lord, that I may see again.'
Jesus said to him, 'Receive your sight. Your faith has healed you.'
Immediately he received his sight, and followed him, glorifying God. All the people, when they saw it, praised God.
In those days, John the Baptizer came, preaching in the wilderness of Judea, saying,
'Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand!'
For this is he who was spoken of by Isaiah the prophet, saying, 'The voice of one crying in the wilderness, make ready the way of the Lord. Make his paths straight.'
Now John himself wore clothing made of camel's hair, with a leather belt around his waist. His food was locusts and wild honey.
Then people from Jerusalem, all of Judea, and all the region around the Jordan went out to him.
They were baptized by him in the Jordan, confessing their sins.
But when he saw many of the Pharisees and Sadducees coming for his baptism, he said to them, 'You offspring of vipers, who warned you to flee from the wrath to come?
Therefore bring forth fruit worthy of repentance!
Don't think to yourselves, 'We have Abraham for our father,' for I tell you that God is able to raise up children to Abraham from these stones.
'Even now the axe lies at the root of the trees. Therefore, every tree that doesn't bring forth good fruit is cut down, and cast into the fire.
I indeed baptize
His winnowing fork is in his hand, and he will thoroughly cleanse his threshing floor. He will gather his wheat into the barn, but the chaff he will burn up with unquenchable fire.'
Then Jesus came from Galilee to the Jordan to John, to be baptized by him.
But John would have hindered him, saying, 'I need to be baptized by you, and you come to me?'
But Jesus, answering, said to him, 'Allow it now, for this is the fitting way for us to fulfill all righteousness.' Then he allowed him.
Jesus, when he was baptized, went up directly from the water: and behold, the heavens were opened to him. He saw the Spirit of God descending as a dove, and coming on him.
Behold, a voice out of the heavens said, 'This is my beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased.'
Paul, a servant of Jesus Christ, called to be an apostle, set apart for the Good News of God,
which he promised before through his prophets in the holy Scriptures,
concerning his Son, who was born of the seed of David according to the flesh,
who was declared to be the Son of God with power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the dead, Jesus Christ our Lord,
through whom we received grace and apostleship, for obedience of faith among all the nations, for his name's sake;
among whom you are also called to belong to Jesus Christ;
to all who are in Rome, beloved of God, called to be saints: Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
First, I thank my God through Jesus Christ for all of you, that your faith is proclaimed throughout the whole world.
For God is my witness, whom I serve in my spirit in the Good News of his Son, how unceasingly I make mention of you always in my prayers,
requesting, if by any means now at last I may be prospered by the will of God to come to you.
For I long to see you, that I may impart to you some spiritual gift, to the end that you may be established;
that is, that I with you may be encouraged in you, each of us by the other's faith, both yours and mine.
Now I don't desire to have you unaware, brothers, that I often planned to come to you, and was hindered so far, that I might have some fruit among you also, even as among the rest of the Gentiles.
I am debtor both to Greeks and to foreigners, both to the wise and to the foolish.
So, as much as is in me, I am eager to preach the Good News to you also who are in Rome.
For I am not ashamed of the Good News of Christ, for it is the power of God for salvation for everyone who believes; for the Jew first, and also for the Greek.
For in it is revealed God's righteousness from faith to faith. As it is written, 'But the righteous shall live by faith.'
For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who suppress the truth in unrighteousness,
because that which is known of God is revealed in them, for God revealed it to them.
For the invisible things of him since the creation of the world are clearly seen, being perceived through the things that are made, even his everlasting power and divinity; that they may be without excuse.
Because, knowing God, they didn't glorify him as God, neither gave thanks, but became vain in their reasoning, and their senseless heart was darkened.
Professing themselves to be wise, they became fools,
and traded the glory of the incorruptible God for the likeness of an image of corruptible man, and of birds, and four-footed animals, and creeping things.
Therefore God also gave them up in the lusts of their hearts to uncleanness, that their bodies should be dishonored among themselves,
who exchanged the truth of God for a lie, and worshiped and served the creature rather than the Creator, who is blessed forever. Amen.
For this reason, God gave them up to vile passions. For their women changed the natural function into that which is against nature.
Likewise also the men, leaving the natural function of the woman, burned in their lust toward one another, men doing what is inappropriate with men, and receiving in themselves the due penalty of their error.
Even as they refused to have God in their knowledge, God gave them up to a reprobate mind, to do those things which are not fitting;
being filled with all unrighteousness, sexual immorality, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness; full of envy, murder, strife, deceit, evil habits, secret slanderers,
backbiters, hateful to God, insolent, haughty, boastful, inventors of evil things, disobedient to parents,
without understanding, covenant breakers, without natural affection, unforgiving, unmerciful;
who, knowing the ordinance of God, that those who practice such things are worthy of death, not only do the same, but also approve of those who practice them.
After the uproar had ceased, Paul sent for the disciples, took leave of them, and departed to go into Macedonia.
When he had gone through those parts, and had encouraged them with many words, he came into Greece.
When he had spent three months there, and a plot was made against him by Jews as he was about to set sail for Syria, he determined to return through Macedonia.
These accompanied him as far as Asia: Sopater of Beroea; Aristarchus and Secundus of the Thessalonians; Gaius of Derbe; Timothy; and Tychicus and Trophimus of Asia.
But these had gone ahead, and were waiting for us at Troas.
We sailed away from Philippi after the days of Unleavened Bread, and came to them at Troas in five days, where we stayed seven days.
On the first day of the week, when the disciples were gathered together to break bread, Paul talked with them, intending to depart on the next day, and continued his speech until midnight.
There were many lights in the upper chamber where we were gathered together.
A certain young man named Eutychus sat in the window, weighed down with deep sleep. As Paul spoke still longer, being weighed down by his sleep, he fell down from the third story, and was taken up dead.
Paul went down, and fell upon him, and embracing him said, 'Don't be troubled, for his life is in him.'
When he had gone up, and had broken bread, and eaten, and had talked with them a long while, even until break of day, he departed.
They brought the boy in alive, and were greatly comforted.
But we who went ahead to the ship set sail for Assos, intending to take Paul aboard there, for he had so arranged, intending himself to go by land.
When he met us at Assos, we took him aboard, and came to Mitylene.
Sailing from there, we came the following day opposite Chios. The next day we touched at Samos and stayed at Trogyllium, and the day after we came to Miletus.
For Paul had determined to sail past Ephesus, that he might not have to spend time in Asia; for he was hastening, if it were possible for him, to be in Jerusalem on the day of Pentecost.
From Miletus he sent to Ephesus, and called to himself the elders of the assembly.
When they had come to him, he said to them, 'You yourselves know, from the first day that I set foot in Asia, how I was with you all the time,
serving the Lord with all humility, with many tears, and with trials which happened to me by the plots of the Jews;
how I didn't shrink from declaring to you anything that was profitable, teaching you publicly and from house to house,
testifying both to Jews and to Greeks repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus.
Now, behold, I go bound by the Spirit to Jerusalem, not knowing what will happen to me there;
except that the Holy Spirit testifies in every city, saying that bonds and afflictions wait for me.
But these things don't count; nor do I hold my life dear to myself, so that I may finish my race with joy, and the ministry which I received from the Lord Jesus, to fully testify to the Good News of the grace of God.
'Now, behold, I know that you all, among whom I went about preaching the Kingdom of God, will see my face no more.
Therefore I testify to you this day that I am clean from the blood of all men,
for I didn't shrink from declaring to you the whole counsel of God.
Take heed, therefore, to yourselves, and to all the flock, in which the Holy Spirit has made you overseers, to shepherd the assembly of the Lord and God which he purchased with his own blood.
For I know that after my departure, vicious wolves will enter in among you, not sparing the flock.
Men will arise from among your own selves, speaking perverse things, to draw away the disciples after them.
Therefore watch, remembering that for a period of three years I didn't cease to admonish everyone night and day with tears.
Now, brothers, I entrust you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to build up, and to give you the inheritance among all those who are sanctified.
I coveted no one's silver, or gold, or clothing.
You yourselves know that these hands served my necessities, and those who were with me.
In all things I gave you an example, that so laboring you ought to help the weak, and to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, that he himself said, 'It is more blessed to give than to receive.''
When he had spoken these things, he knelt down and prayed with them all.
They all wept a lot, and fell on Paul's neck and kissed him,
sorrowing most of all because of the word which he had spoken, that they should see his face no more. And they accompanied him to the ship.
If then you were raised together with Christ, seek the things that are above, where Christ is, seated on the right hand of God.
Set your mind on the things that are above, not on the things that are on the earth.
For you died, and your life is hidden with Christ in God.
When Christ, our life, is revealed, then you will also be revealed with him in glory.
Put to death therefore your members which are on the earth: sexual immorality, uncleanness, depraved passion, evil desire, and covetousness, which is idolatry;
for which things' sake the wrath of God comes on the children of disobedience.
You also once walked in those, when you lived in them;
but now you also put them all away: anger, wrath, malice, slander, and shameful speaking out of your mouth.
Don't lie to one another, seeing that you have put off the old man with his doings,
and have put on the new man, who is being renewed in knowledge after the image of his Creator,
where there can't be Greek and Jew, circumcision and uncircumcision, barbarian, Scythian, bondservant, freeman; but Christ is all, and in all.
Put on therefore, as God's chosen ones, holy and beloved, a heart of compassion, kindness, lowliness, humility, and perseverance;
bearing with one another, and forgiving each other, if any man has a complaint against any; even as Christ forgave you, so you also do.
Above all these things, walk in love, which is the bond of perfection.
And let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to which also you were called in one body; and be thankful.
Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly; in all wisdom teaching and admonishing one another with psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs, singing with grace in your heart to the Lord.
Whatever you do, in word or in deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father, through him.
Wives, be in subjection to your husbands, as is fitting in the Lord.
Husbands, love your wives, and don't be bitter against them.
Children, obey your parents in all things, for this pleases the Lord.
Fathers, don't provoke your children, so that they won't be discouraged.
Servants, obey in all things those who are your masters according to the flesh, not just when they are looking, as men pleasers, but in singleness of heart, fearing God.
And whatever you do, work heartily, as for the Lord, and not for men,
knowing that from the Lord you will receive the reward of the inheritance; for you serve the Lord Christ.
But he who does wrong will receive again for the wrong that he has done, and there is no partiality.
The elder, to the chosen lady and her children, whom I love in truth; and not I only, but also all those who know the truth;
for the truth's sake, which remains in us, and it will be with us forever:
Grace, mercy, and peace will be with us, from God the Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the Father, in truth and love.
I rejoice greatly that I have found some of your children walking in truth, even as we have been commanded by the Father.
Now I beg you, dear lady, not as though I wrote to you a new commandment, but that which we had from the beginning, that we love one another.
This is love, that we should walk according to his commandments. This is the commandment, even as you heard from the beginning, that you should walk in it.
For many deceivers have gone out into the world, those who don't confess that Jesus Christ came in the flesh. This is the deceiver and the Antichrist.
Watch yourselves, that we don't lose the things which we have accomplished, but that we receive a full reward.
Whoever transgresses and doesn't remain in the teaching of Christ, doesn't have God. He who remains in the teaching, the same has both the Father and the Son.
If anyone comes to you, and doesn't bring this teaching, don't receive him into your house, and don't welcome him,
for he who welcomes him participates in his evil works.
Having many things to write to you, I don't want to do so with paper and ink, but I hope to come to you, and to speak face to face, that our joy may be made full.
The children of your chosen sister greet you. Amen.
Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ through the will of God, according to the promise of the life which is in Christ Jesus,
to Timothy, my beloved child: Grace, mercy, and peace, from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.
I thank God, whom I serve as my forefathers did, with a pure conscience. How unceasing is my memory of you in my petitions, night and day
longing to see you, remembering your tears, that I may be filled with joy;
having been reminded of the unfeigned faith that is in you; which lived first in your grandmother Lois, and your mother Eunice, and, I am persuaded, in you also.
For this cause, I remind you that you should stir up the gift of God which is in you through the laying on of my hands.
For God didn't give us a spirit of fear, but of power, love, and self-control.
Therefore don't be ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, nor of me his prisoner; but endure hardship for the Good News according to the power of God,
who saved us and called us with a holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given to us in Christ Jesus before times eternal,
but has now been revealed by the appearing of our Savior, Christ Jesus, who abolished death, and brought life and immortality to light through the Good News.
For this, I was appointed as a preacher, an apostle, and a teacher of the Gentiles.
For this cause I also suffer these things. Yet I am not ashamed, for I know him whom I have believed, and I am persuaded that he is able to guard that which I have committed to him against that day.
Hold the pattern of sound words which you have heard from me, in faith and love which is in Christ Jesus.
That good thing which was committed to you, guard through the Holy Spirit who dwells in us.
This you know, that all who are in Asia turned away from me; of whom are Phygelus and Hermogenes.
May the Lord grant mercy to the house of Onesiphorus, for he often refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain,
but when he was in Rome, he sought me diligently, and found me
(the Lord grant to him to find the Lord's mercy in that day); and in how many things he served at Ephesus, you know very well.
I saw another great and marvelous sign in the sky: seven angels having the seven last plagues, for in them God's wrath is finished.
I saw something like a sea of glass mixed with fire, and those who overcame the beast, his image, and the number of his name, standing on the sea of glass, having harps of God.
They sang the song of Moses, the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb, saying, 'Great and marvelous are your works, Lord God, the Almighty! Righteous and true are your ways, you King of the nations.
Who wouldn't fear you, Lord, and glorify your name? For you only are holy. For all the nations will come and worship before you. For your righteous acts have been revealed.'
After these things I looked, and the temple of the tabernacle of the testimony in heaven was opened.
The seven angels who had the seven plagues came out, clothed with pure, bright linen, and wearing golden sashes around their breasts.
One of the four living creatures gave to the seven angels seven golden bowls full of the wrath of God, who lives forever and ever.
The temple was filled with smoke from the glory of God, and from his power. No one was able to enter into the temple, until the seven plagues of the seven angels would be finished.
Then Jesus spoke to the multitudes and to his disciples,
saying, 'The scribes and the Pharisees sat on Moses' seat.
All things therefore whatever they tell you to observe, observe and do, but don't do their works; for they say, and don't do.
For they bind heavy burdens that are grievous to be borne, and lay them on men's shoulders; but they themselves will not lift a finger to help them.
But all their works they do to be seen by men. They make their phylacteries of their garments,
and love the place of honor at feasts, the best seats in the synagogues,
the salutations in the marketplaces, and to be called 'Rabbi, Rabbi' by men.
But don't you be called 'Rabbi,' for one is your teacher, the Christ, and all of you are brothers.
Call no man on the earth your father, for one is your Father, he who is in heaven.
Neither be called masters, for one is your master, the Christ.
But he who is greatest among you will be your servant.
Whoever exalts himself will be humbled, and whoever humbles himself will be exalted.
'Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you devour widows' houses, and as a pretense you make long prayers. Therefore you will receive greater condemnation.
'But woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! Because you shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against men; for you don't enter in yourselves, neither do you allow those who are entering in to enter.
Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you travel around by sea and land to make one proselyte; and when he becomes one, you make him twice as much of a son of Gehenna as yourselves.
'Woe to you, you blind guides, who say, 'Whoever swears by the temple, it is nothing; but whoever swears by the gold of the temple, he is obligated.'
You blind fools! For which is greater, the gold, or the temple that sanctifies the gold?
'Whoever swears by the altar, it is nothing; but whoever swears by the gift that is on it, he is obligated?'
You blind fools! For which is greater, the gift, or the altar that sanctifies the gift?
He therefore who swears by the altar, swears by it, and by everything on it.
He who swears by the temple, swears by it, and by him who was living in it.
He who swears by heaven, swears by the throne of God, and by him who sits on it.
'Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you tithe mint, dill, and cumin, and have left undone the weightier matters of the law: justice, mercy, and faith. But you ought to have done these, and not to have left the other undone.
You blind guides, who strain out a gnat, and swallow a camel!
'Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you clean the outside of the cup and of the platter, but within they are full of extortion and unrighteousness.
You blind Pharisee, first clean the inside of the cup and of the platter, that its outside may become clean also.
'Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you are like whitened tombs, which outwardly appear beautiful, but inwardly are full of dead men's bones, and of all uncleanness.
Even so you also outwardly appear righteous to men, but inwardly you are full of hypocrisy and iniquity.
'Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you build the tombs of the prophets, and decorate the tombs of the righteous,
and say, 'If we had lived in the days of our fathers, we wouldn't have been partakers with them in the blood of the prophets.'
Therefore you testify to yourselves that you are children of those who killed the prophets.
Fill up, then, the measure of your fathers.
You serpents, you offspring of vipers, how will you escape the judgment of Gehenna?
Therefore, behold, I send to you prophets, wise men, and scribes. Some of them you will kill and crucify; and some of them you will scourge in your synagogues, and persecute from city to city;
that on you may come all the righteous blood shed on the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel to the blood of Zachariah son of Barachiah, whom you killed between the sanctuary and the altar.
Most certainly I tell you, all these things will come upon this generation.
'Jerusalem, Jerusalem, who kills the prophets, and stones those who are sent to her! How often I would have gathered your children together, even as a hen gathers her chicks under her wings, and you would not!
Behold, your house is left to you desolate.
For I tell you, you will not see me from now on, until you say, 'Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord!''
He came to Derbe and Lystra: and behold, a certain disciple was there, named Timothy, the son of a Jewess who believed; but his father was a Greek.
The brothers who were at Lystra and Iconium gave a good testimony about him.
Paul wanted to have him go out with him, and he took and circumcised him because of the Jews who were in those parts; for they all knew that his father was a Greek.
As they went on their way through the cities, they delivered the decrees to them to keep which had been ordained by the apostles and elders who were at Jerusalem.
So the assemblies were strengthened in the faith, and increased in number daily.
When they had gone through the region of Phrygia and Galatia, they were forbidden by the Holy Spirit to speak the word in Asia.
When they had come opposite Mysia, they tried to go into Bithynia, but the Spirit didn't allow them.
Passing by Mysia, they came down to Troas.
A vision appeared to Paul in the night. There was a man of Macedonia standing, begging him, and saying, 'Come over into Macedonia and help us.'
When he had seen the vision, immediately we sought to go out to Macedonia, concluding that the Lord had called us to preach the Good News to them.
Setting sail therefore from Troas, we made a straight course to Samothrace, and the day following to Neapolis;
and from there to Philippi, which is a city of Macedonia, the foremost of the district, a Roman colony. We were staying some days in this city.
On the Sabbath day we went forth outside of the city by a riverside, where we supposed there was a place of prayer, and we sat down, and spoke to the women who had come together.
A certain woman named Lydia, a seller of purple, of the city of Thyatira, one who worshiped God, heard us; whose heart the Lord opened to listen to the things which were spoken by Paul.
When she and her household were baptized, she begged us, saying, 'If you have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house, and stay.' So she persuaded us.
It happened, as we were going to prayer, that a certain girl having a spirit of divination met us, who brought her masters much gain by fortune telling.
Following Paul and us, she cried out, 'These men are servants of the Most High God, who proclaim to us a way of salvation!'
She was doing this for many days. But Paul, becoming greatly annoyed, turned and said to the spirit, 'I command you in the name of Jesus Christ to come out of her!' It came out that very hour.
But when her masters saw that the hope of their gain was gone, they seized Paul and Silas, and dragged them into the marketplace before the rulers.
When they had brought them to the magistrates, they said, 'These men, being Jews, are agitating our city,
and set forth customs which it is not lawful for us to accept or to observe, being Romans.'
The multitude rose up together against them, and the magistrates tore their clothes off of them, and commanded them to be beaten with rods.
When they had laid many stripes on them, they threw them into prison, charging the jailer to keep them safely,
who, having received such a command, threw them into the inner prison, and secured their feet in the stocks.
But about midnight Paul and Silas were praying and singing hymns to God, and the prisoners were listening to them.
Suddenly there was a great earthquake, so that the foundations of the prison were shaken; and immediately all the doors were opened, and everyone's bonds were loosened.
The jailer, being roused out of sleep and seeing the prison doors open, drew his sword and was about to kill himself, supposing that the prisoners had escaped.
But Paul cried with a loud voice, saying, 'Don't harm yourself, for we are all here!'
He called for lights and sprang in, and, fell down trembling before Paul and Silas,
and brought them out and said, 'Sirs, what must I do to be saved?'
They said, 'Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and you will be saved, you and your household.'
They spoke the word of the Lord to him, and to all who were in his house.
He took them the same hour of the night, and washed their stripes, and was immediately baptized, he and all his household.
He brought them up into his house, and set food before them, and rejoiced greatly, with all his household, having believed in God.
But when it was day, the magistrates sent the sergeants, saying, 'Let those men go.'
The jailer reported these words to Paul, saying, 'The magistrates have sent to let you go; now therefore come out, and go in peace.'
But Paul said to them, 'They have beaten us publicly, without a trial, men who are Romans, and have cast us into prison! Do they now release us secretly? No, most certainly, but let them come themselves and bring us out!'
The sergeants reported these words to the magistrates, and they were afraid when they heard that they were Romans,
and they came and begged them. When they had brought them out, they asked them to depart from the city.
They went out of the prison, and entered into Lydia's house. When they had seen the brothers, they encouraged them, and departed.
Therefore, holy brothers, partakers of a heavenly calling, consider the Apostle and High Priest of our confession, Jesus;
who was faithful to him who appointed him, as also was Moses in all his house.
For he has been counted worthy of more glory than Moses, inasmuch as he who built the house has more honor than the house.
For every house is built by someone; but he who built all things is God.
Moses indeed was faithful in all his house as a servant, for a testimony of those things which were afterward to be spoken,
but Christ is faithful as a Son over his house; whose house we are, if we hold fast our confidence and the glorying of our hope firm to the end.
Therefore, even as the Holy Spirit says,  'Today if you will hear his voice,
don't harden your hearts, as in the provocation, like as in the day of the trial in the wilderness,
where your fathers tested me by proving me, and saw my works for forty years.
Therefore I was displeased with that generation, and said, 'They always err in their heart, but they didn't know my ways;'
as I swore in my wrath, 'They will not enter into my rest.''
Beware, brothers, lest perhaps there be in any one of you an evil heart of unbelief, in falling away from the living God;
but exhort one another day by day, so long as it is called 'today;' lest any one of you be hardened by the deceitfulness of sin.
For we have become partakers of Christ, if we hold fast the beginning of our confidence firm to the end:
while it is said, 'Today if you will hear his voice, don't harden your hearts, as in the rebellion.'
For who, when they heard, rebelled? No, didn't all those who came out of Egypt by Moses?
With whom was he displeased forty years? Wasn't it with those who sinned, whose bodies fell in the wilderness?
To whom did he swear that they wouldn't enter into his rest, but to those who were disobedient?
We see that they were not able to enter in because of unbelief.
Now I Paul, myself, entreat you by the humility and gentleness of Christ; I who in your presence am lowly among you, but being absent am of good courage toward you.
Yes, I beg you that I may not, when present, show courage with the confidence with which I intend to be bold against some, who consider us to be walking according to the flesh.
For though we walk in the flesh, we don't wage war according to the flesh;
for the weapons of our warfare are not of the flesh, but mighty before God to the throwing down of strongholds,
throwing down imaginations and every high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of God, and bringing every thought into captivity to the obedience of Christ;
and being in readiness to avenge all disobedience, when your obedience will be made full.
Do you look at things only as they appear in front of your face? If anyone trusts in himself that he is Christ's, let him consider this again with himself, that, even as he is Christ's, so also we are Christ's.
For though I should boast somewhat abundantly concerning our authority, (which the Lord gave for building you up, and not for casting you down) I will not be disappointed,
that I may not seem as if I desire to terrify you by my letters.
For, 'His letters,' they say, 'are weighty and strong, but his bodily presence is weak, and his speech is despised.'
Let such a person consider this, that what we are in word by letters when we are absent, such are we also in deed when we are present.
For we are not bold to number or compare ourselves with some of those who commend themselves. But they themselves, measuring themselves by themselves, and comparing themselves with themselves, are without understanding.
But we will not boast beyond proper limits, but within the boundaries with which God appointed to us, which reach even to you.
For we don't stretch ourselves too much, as though we didn't reach to you. For we came even as far as to you with the Good News of Christ,
not boasting beyond proper limits in other men's labors, but having hope that as your faith grows, we will be abundantly enlarged by you in our sphere of influence,
so as to preach the Good News even to the parts beyond you, not to boast in what someone else has already done.
But 'he who boasts, let him boast in the Lord.'
For it isn't he who commends himself who is approved, but whom the Lord commends.
But concerning the times and the seasons, brothers, you have no need that anything be written to you.
For you yourselves know well that the day of the Lord comes like a thief in the night.
For when they are saying, 'Peace and safety,' then sudden destruction will come on them, like birth pains on a pregnant woman; and they will in no way escape.
But you, brothers, aren't in darkness, that the day should overtake you like a thief.
You are all children of light, and children of the day. We don't belong to the night, nor to darkness,
so then let's not sleep, as the rest do, but let's watch and be sober.
For those who sleep, sleep in the night, and those who are drunk are drunk in the night.
But let us, since we belong to the day, be sober, putting on the breastplate of faith and love, and, for a helmet, the hope of salvation.
For God didn't appoint us to wrath, but to the obtaining of salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ,
who died for us, that, whether we wake or sleep, we should live together with him.
Therefore exhort one another, and build each other up, even as you also do.
But we beg you, brothers, to know those who labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you,
and to respect and honor them in love for their work's sake. Be at peace among yourselves.
We exhort you, brothers, admonish the disorderly, encourage the fainthearted, support the weak, be patient toward all.
See that no one returns evil for evil to anyone, but always follow after that which is good, for one another, and for all.
Rejoice always.
Pray without ceasing.
In everything give thanks, for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus toward you.
Don't quench the Spirit.
Don't despise prophesies.
Test all things, and hold firmly that which is good.
Abstain from every form of evil.
May the God of peace himself sanctify you completely. May your whole spirit, soul, and body be preserved blameless at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
He who calls you is faithful, who will also do it.
Brothers, pray for us.
Greet all the brothers with a holy kiss.
I solemnly command you by the Lord that this letter be read to all the holy brothers.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. Amen.
It happened, when he went into the house of one of the rulers of the Pharisees on a Sabbath to eat bread, that they were watching him.
Behold, a certain man who had dropsy was in front of him.
Jesus, answering, spoke to the lawyers and Pharisees, saying, 'Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath?'
But they were silent. He took him, and healed him, and let him go.
He answered them, 'Which of you, if your son or an ox fell into a well, wouldn't immediately pull him out on a Sabbath day?'
They couldn't answer him regarding these things.
He spoke a parable to those who were invited, when he noticed how they chose the best seats, and said to them,
'When you are invited by anyone to a marriage feast, don't sit in the best seat, since perhaps someone more honorable than you might be invited by him,
and he who invited both of you would come and tell you, 'Make room for this person.' Then you would begin, with shame, to take the lowest place.
But when you are invited, go and sit in the lowest place, so that when he who invited you comes, he may tell you, 'Friend, move up higher.' Then you will be honored in the presence of all who sit at the table with you.
For everyone who exalts himself will be humbled, and whoever humbles himself will be exalted.'
He also said to the one who had invited him, 'When you make a dinner or a supper, don't call your friends, nor your brothers, nor your kinsmen, nor rich neighbors, or perhaps they might also return the favor, and pay you back.
But when you make a feast, ask the poor, the maimed, the lame, or the blind;
and you will be blessed, because they don't have the resources to repay you. For you will be repaid in the resurrection of the righteous.'
When one of those who sat at the table with him heard these things, he said to him, 'Blessed is he who will feast in the Kingdom of God!'
But he said to him, 'A certain man made a great supper, and he invited many people.
He sent out his servant at supper time to tell those who were invited, 'Come, for everything is ready now.'
They all as one began to make excuses. 'The first said to him, 'I have bought a field, and I must go and see it. Please have me excused.'
'Another said, 'I have bought five yoke of oxen, and I must go try them out. Please have me excused.'
'Another said, 'I have married a wife, and therefore I can't come.'
'That servant came, and told his lord these things. Then the master of the house, being angry, said to his servant, 'Go out quickly into the streets and lanes of the city, and bring in the poor, maimed, blind, and lame.'
'The servant said, 'Lord, it is done as you commanded, and there is still room.'
'The lord said to the servant, 'Go out into the highways and hedges, and compel them to come in, that my house may be filled.
For I tell you that none of those men who were invited will taste of my supper.''
Now great multitudes were going with him. He turned and said to them,
'If anyone comes to me, and doesn't hate his own father, mother, wife, children, brothers, and sisters, yes, and his own life also, he can't be my disciple.
Whoever doesn't bear his own cross, and come after me, can't be my disciple.
For which of you, desiring to build a tower, doesn't first sit down and count the cost, to see if he has enough to complete it?
Or perhaps, when he has laid a foundation, and is not able to finish, everyone who sees begins to mock him,
saying, 'This man began to build, and wasn't able to finish.'
Or what king, as he goes to encounter another king in war, will not sit down first and consider whether he is able with ten thousand to meet him who comes against him with twenty thousand?
Or else, while the other is yet a great way off, he sends an envoy, and asks for conditions of peace.
So therefore whoever of you who doesn't renounce all that he has, he can't be my disciple.
Salt is good, but if the salt becomes flat and tasteless, with what do you season it?
It is fit neither for the soil nor for the manure pile. It is thrown out. He who has ears to hear, let him hear.'
Now a certain man was sick, Lazarus from Bethany, of the village of Mary and her sister, Martha.
It was that Mary who had anointed the Lord with ointment, and wiped his feet with her hair, whose brother, Lazarus, was sick.
The sisters therefore sent to him, saying, 'Lord, behold, he for whom you have great affection is sick.'
But when Jesus heard it, he said, 'This sickness is not to death, but for the glory of God, that God's Son may be glorified by it.'
Now Jesus loved Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus.
When therefore he heard that he was sick, he stayed two days in the place where he was.
Then after this he said to the disciples, 'Let's go into Judea again.'
The disciples told him, 'Rabbi, the Jews were just trying to stone you, and are you going there again?'
Jesus answered, 'Aren't there twelve hours of daylight? If a man walks in the day, he doesn't stumble, because he sees the light of this world.
But if a man walks in the night, he stumbles, because the light isn't in him.'
He said these things, and after that, he said to them, 'Our friend, Lazarus, has fallen asleep, but I am going so that I may awake him out of sleep.'
The disciples therefore said, 'Lord, if he has fallen asleep, he will recover.'
Now Jesus had spoken of his death, but they thought that he spoke of taking rest in sleep.
So Jesus said to them plainly then, 'Lazarus is dead.
I am glad for your sakes that I was not there, so that you may believe. Nevertheless, let's go to him.'
Thomas therefore, who is called Didymus, said to his fellow disciples, 'Let's go also, that we may die with him.'
So when Jesus came, he found that he had been in the tomb four days already.
Now Bethany was near Jerusalem, about fifteen stadia away.
Many of the Jews had joined the women around Martha and Mary, to console them concerning their brother.
Then when Martha heard that Jesus was coming, she went and met him, but Mary stayed in the house.
Therefore Martha said to Jesus, 'Lord, if you would have been here, my brother wouldn't have died.
Even now I know that, whatever you ask of God, God will give you.'
Jesus said to her, 'Your brother will rise again.'
Martha said to him, 'I know that he will rise again in the resurrection at the last day.'
Jesus said to her, 'I am the resurrection and the life. He who believes in me will still live, even if he dies.
Whoever lives and believes in me will never die. Do you believe this?'
She said to him, 'Yes, Lord. I have come to believe that you are the Christ, God's Son, he who comes into the world.'
When she had said this, she went away, and called Mary, her sister, secretly, saying, 'The Teacher is here, and is calling you.'
When she heard this, she arose quickly, and went to him.
Now Jesus had not yet come into the village, but was in the place where Martha met him.
Then the Jews who were with her in the house, and were consoling her, when they saw Mary, that she rose up quickly and went out, followed her, saying, 'She is going to the tomb to weep there.'
Therefore when Mary came to where Jesus was, and saw him, she fell down at his feet, saying to him, 'Lord, if you would have been here, my brother wouldn't have died.'
When Jesus therefore saw her weeping, and the Jews weeping who came with her, he groaned in the spirit, and was troubled,
and said, 'Where have you laid him?' They told him, 'Lord, come and see.'
Jesus wept.
The Jews therefore said, 'See how much affection he had for him!'
Some of them said, 'Couldn't this man, who opened the eyes of him who was blind, have also kept this man from dying?'
Jesus therefore, again groaning in himself, came to the tomb. Now it was a cave, and a stone lay against it.
Jesus said, 'Take away the stone.' Martha, the sister of him who was dead, said to him, 'Lord, by this time there is a stench, for he has been dead four days.'
Jesus said to her, 'Didn't I tell you that if you believed, you would see God's glory?'
So they took away the stone from the place where the dead man was lying. Jesus lifted up his eyes, and said, 'Father, I thank you that you listened to me.
I know that you always listen to me, but because of the multitude that stands around I said this, that they may believe that you sent me.'
When he had said this, he cried with a loud voice, 'Lazarus, come out!'
He who was dead came out, bound hand and foot with wrappings, and his face was wrapped around with a cloth. Jesus said to them, 'Free him, and let him go.'
Therefore many of the Jews, who came to Mary and saw what Jesus did, believed in him.
But some of them went away to the Pharisees, and told them the things which Jesus had done.
The chief priests therefore and the Pharisees gathered a council, and said, 'What are we doing? For this man does many signs.
If we leave him alone like this, everyone will believe in him, and the Romans will come and take away both our place and our nation.'
But a certain one of them, Caiaphas, being high priest that year, said to them, 'You know nothing at all,
nor do you consider that it is advantageous for us that one man should die for the people, and that the whole nation not perish.'
Now he didn't say this of himself, but being high priest that year, he prophesied that Jesus would die for the nation,
and not for the nation only, but that he might also gather together into one the children of God who are scattered abroad.
So from that day forward they took counsel that they might put him to death.
Jesus therefore walked no more openly among the Jews, but departed from there into the country near the wilderness, to a city called Ephraim. He stayed there with his disciples.
Now the Passover of the Jews was at hand. Many went up from the country to Jerusalem before the Passover, to purify themselves.
Then they sought for Jesus and spoke one with another, as they stood in the temple, 'What do you think--that he isn't coming to the feast at all?'
Now the chief priests and the Pharisees had commanded that if anyone knew where he was, he should report it, that they might seize him.
Simon Peter, a servant and apostle of Jesus Christ, to those who have obtained a like precious faith with us in the righteousness of our God and Savior, Jesus Christ:
Grace to you and peace be multiplied in the knowledge of God and of Jesus our Lord,
seeing that his divine power has granted to us all things that pertain to life and godliness, through the knowledge of him who called us by his own glory and virtue;
by which he has granted to us his precious and exceedingly great promises; that through these you may become partakers of the divine nature, having escaped from the corruption that is in the world by lust.
Yes, and for this very cause adding on your part all diligence, in your faith supply moral excellence; and in moral excellence, knowledge;
and in knowledge, self-control; and in self-control patience; and in patience godliness;
and in godliness brotherly affection; and in brotherly affection, love.
For if these things are yours and abound, they make you to be not idle nor unfruitful to the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.
For he who lacks these things is blind, seeing only what is near, having forgotten the cleansing from his old sins.
Therefore, brothers, be more diligent to make your calling and election sure. For if you do these things, you will never stumble.
For thus you will be richly supplied with the entrance into the eternal Kingdom of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ.
Therefore I will not be negligent to remind you of these things, though you know them, and are established in the present truth.
I think it right, as long as I am in this tent, to stir you up by reminding you;
knowing that the putting off of my tent comes swiftly, even as our Lord Jesus Christ made clear to me.
Yes, I will make every effort that you may always be able to remember these things even after my departure.
For we did not follow cunningly devised fables, when we made known to you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but we were eyewitnesses of his majesty.
For he received from God the Father honor and glory, when the voice came to him from the Majestic Glory, 'This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.'
We heard this voice come out of heaven when we were with him on the holy mountain.
We have the more sure word of prophecy; and you do well that you heed it, as to a lamp shining in a dark place, until the day dawns, and the morning star arises in your hearts:
knowing this first, that no prophecy of Scripture is of private interpretation.
For no prophecy ever came by the will of man: but holy men of God spoke, being moved by the Holy Spirit.
It happened when Jesus had finished these words, he departed from Galilee, and came into the borders of Judea beyond the Jordan.
Great multitudes followed him, and he healed them there.
Pharisees came to him, testing him, and saying, 'Is it lawful for a man to divorce his wife for any reason?'
He answered, 'Haven't you read that he who made them from the beginning made them male and female,
and said, 'For this cause a man shall leave his father and mother, and shall join to his wife; and the two shall become one flesh?'
So that they are no more two, but one flesh. What therefore God has joined together, don't let man tear apart.'
They asked him, 'Why then did Moses command us to give her a bill of divorce, and divorce her?'
He said to them, 'Moses, because of the hardness of your hearts, allowed you to divorce your wives, but from the beginning it has not been so.
I tell you that whoever divorces his wife, except for sexual immorality, and marries another, commits adultery; and he who marries her when she is divorced commits adultery.'
His disciples said to him, 'If this is the case of the man with his wife, it is not expedient to marry.'
But he said to them, 'Not all men can receive this saying, but those to whom it is given.
For there are eunuchs who were born that way from their mother's womb, and there are eunuchs who were made eunuchs by men; and there are eunuchs who made themselves eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heaven's sake. He who is able to receive it, let him receive it.'
Then little children were brought to him, that he should lay his hands on them and pray; and the disciples rebuked them.
But Jesus said, 'Allow the little children, and don't forbid them to come to me; for the Kingdom of Heaven belongs to ones like these.'
He laid his hands on them, and departed from there.
Behold, one came to him and said, 'Good teacher, what good thing shall I do, that I may have eternal life?'
He said to him, 'Why do you call me good? No one is good but one, that is, God. But if you want to enter into life, keep the commandments.'
He said to him, 'Which ones?' Jesus said, ''You shall not murder.' 'You shall not commit adultery.' 'You shall not steal.' 'You shall not offer false testimony.'
'Honor your father and mother.'
The young man said to him, 'All these things I have observed from my youth. What do I still lack?'
Jesus said to him, 'If you want to be perfect, go, sell what you have, and give to the poor, and you will have treasure in heaven; and come, follow me.'
But when the young man heard the saying, he went away sad, for he was one who had great possessions.
Jesus said to his disciples, 'Most certainly I say to you, a rich man will enter into the Kingdom of Heaven with difficulty.
Again I tell you, it is easier for a camel to go through a needle's eye, than for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of God.'
When the disciples heard it, they were exceedingly astonished, saying, 'Who then can be saved?'
Looking at them, Jesus said, 'With men this is impossible, but with God all things are possible.'
Then Peter answered, 'Behold, we have left everything, and followed you. What then will we have?'
Jesus said to them, 'Most certainly I tell you that you who have followed me, in the regeneration when the Son of Man will sit on the throne of his glory, you also will sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.
Everyone who has left houses, or brothers, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my name's sake, will receive one hundred times, and will inherit eternal life.
But many will be last who are first; and first who are last.
After these things, Jesus was walking in Galilee, for he wouldn't walk in Judea, because the Jews sought to kill him.
Now the feast of the Jews, the Feast of Booths, was at hand.
His brothers therefore said to him, 'Depart from here, and go into Judea, that your disciples also may see your works which you do.
For no one does anything in secret, and himself seeks to be known openly. If you do these things, reveal yourself to the world.'
For even his brothers didn't believe in him.
Jesus therefore said to them, 'My time has not yet come, but your time is always ready.
The world can't hate you, but it hates me, because I testify about it, that its works are evil.
You go up to the feast. I am not yet going up to this feast, because my time is not yet fulfilled.'
Having said these things to them, he stayed in Galilee.
But when his brothers had gone up to the feast, then he also went up, not publicly, but as it were in secret.
The Jews therefore sought him at the feast, and said, 'Where is he?'
There was much murmuring among the multitudes concerning him. Some said, 'He is a good man.' Others said, 'Not so, but he leads the multitude astray.'
Yet no one spoke openly of him for fear of the Jews.
But when it was now the midst of the feast, Jesus went up into the temple and taught.
The Jews therefore marveled, saying, 'How does this man know letters, having never been educated?'
Jesus therefore answered them, 'My teaching is not mine, but his who sent me.
If anyone desires to do his will, he will know about the teaching, whether it is from God, or if I am speaking from myself.
He who speaks from himself seeks his own glory, but he who seeks the glory of him who sent him is true, and no unrighteousness is in him.
Didn't Moses give you the law, and yet none of you keeps the law? Why do you seek to kill me?'
The multitude answered, 'You have a demon! Who seeks to kill you?'
Jesus answered them, 'I did one work, and you all marvel because of it.
Moses has given you circumcision (not that it is of Moses, but of the fathers), and on the Sabbath you circumcise a boy.
If a boy receives circumcision on the Sabbath, that the law of Moses may not be broken, are you angry with me, because I made a man completely healthy on the Sabbath?
Don't judge according to appearance, but judge righteous judgment.'
Therefore some of them of Jerusalem said, 'Isn't this he whom they seek to kill?
Behold, he speaks openly, and they say nothing to him. Can it be that the rulers indeed know that this is truly the Christ?
However we know where this man comes from, but when the Christ comes, no one will know where he comes from.'
Jesus therefore cried out in the temple, teaching and saying, 'You both know me, and know where I am from. I have not come of myself, but he who sent me is true, whom you don't know.
I know him, because I am from him, and he sent me.'
They sought therefore to take him; but no one laid a hand on him, because his hour had not yet come.
But of the multitude, many believed in him. They said, 'When the Christ comes, he won't do more signs than those which this man has done, will he?'
The Pharisees heard the multitude murmuring these things concerning him, and the chief priests and the Pharisees sent officers to arrest him.
Then Jesus said, 'I will be with you a little while longer, then I go to him who sent me.
You will seek me, and won't find me; and where I am, you can't come.'
The Jews therefore said among themselves, 'Where will this man go that we won't find him? Will he go to the Dispersion among the Greeks, and teach the Greeks?
What is this word that he said, 'You will seek me, and won't find me; and where I am, you can't come'?'
Now on the last and greatest day of the feast, Jesus stood and cried out, 'If anyone is thirsty, let him come to me and drink!
He who believes in me, as the Scripture has said, from within him will flow rivers of living water.'
But he said this about the Spirit, which those believing in him were to receive. For the Holy Spirit was not yet given, because Jesus wasn't yet glorified.
Many of the multitude therefore, when they heard these words, said, 'This is truly the prophet.'
Others said, 'This is the Christ.' But some said, 'What, does the Christ come out of Galilee?
Hasn't the Scripture said that the Christ comes of the seed of David, the village where David was?'
So there arose a division in the multitude because of him.
Some of them would have arrested him, but no one laid hands on him.
The officers therefore came to the chief priests and Pharisees, and they said to them, 'Why didn't you bring him?'
The officers answered, 'No man ever spoke like this man!'
The Pharisees therefore answered them, 'You aren't also led astray, are you?
Have any of the rulers believed in him, or of the Pharisees?
But this multitude that doesn't know the law is accursed.'
Nicodemus (he who came to him by night, being one of them) said to them,
'Does our law judge a man, unless it first hears from him personally and knows what he does?'
They answered him, 'Are you also from Galilee? Search, and see that no prophet has arisen out of Galilee.'
Everyone went to his own house,
Again, therefore, Jesus spoke to them, saying, 'I am the light of the world. He who follows me will not walk in the darkness, but will have the light of life.'
The Pharisees therefore said to him, 'You testify about yourself. Your testimony is not valid.'
Jesus answered them, 'Even if I testify about myself, my testimony is true, for I know where I came from, and where I am going; but you don't know where I came from, or where I am going.
You judge according to the flesh. I judge no one.
Even if I do judge, my judgment is true, for I am not alone, but I am with the Father who sent me.
It's also written in your law that the testimony of two people is valid.
I am one who testifies about myself, and the Father who sent me testifies about me.'
They said therefore to him, 'Where is your Father?' Jesus answered, 'You know neither me, nor my Father. If you knew me, you would know my Father also.'
Jesus spoke these words in the treasury, as he taught in the temple. Yet no one arrested him, because his hour had not yet come.
Jesus said therefore again to them, 'I am going away, and you will seek me, and you will die in your sins. Where I go, you can't come.'
The Jews therefore said, 'Will he kill himself, that he says, 'Where I am going, you can't come?''
He said to them, 'You are from beneath. I am from above. You are of this world. I am not of this world.
I said therefore to you that you will die in your sins; for unless you believe that I am he, you will die in your sins.'
They said therefore to him, 'Who are you?' Jesus said to them, 'Just what I have been saying to you from the beginning.
I have many things to speak and to judge concerning you. However he who sent me is true; and the things which I heard from him, these I say to the world.'
They didn't understand that he spoke to them about the Father.
Jesus therefore said to them, 'When you have lifted up the Son of Man, then you will know that I am he, and I do nothing of myself, but as my Father taught me, I say these things.
He who sent me is with me. The Father hasn't left me alone, for I always do the things that are pleasing to him.'
As he spoke these things, many believed in him.
Jesus therefore said to those Jews who had believed him, 'If you remain in my word, then you are truly my disciples.
You will know the truth, and the truth will make you free.'
They answered him, 'We are Abraham's seed, and have never been in bondage to anyone. How do you say, 'You will be made free?''
Jesus answered them, 'Most certainly I tell you, everyone who commits sin is the bondservant of sin.
A bondservant doesn't live in the house forever. A son remains forever.
If therefore the Son makes you free, you will be free indeed.
I know that you are Abraham's seed, yet you seek to kill me, because my word finds no place in you.
I say the things which I have seen with my Father; and you also do the things which you have seen with your father.'
They answered him, 'Our father is Abraham.' Jesus said to them, 'If you were Abraham's children, you would do the works of Abraham.
But now you seek to kill me, a man who has told you the truth, which I heard from God. Abraham didn't do this.
You do the works of your father.' They said to him, 'We were not born of sexual immorality. We have one Father, God.'
Therefore Jesus said to them, 'If God were your father, you would love me, for I came out and have come from God. For I haven't come of myself, but he sent me.
Why don't you understand my speech? Because you can't hear my word.
You are of your father, the devil, and you want to do the desires of your father. He was a murderer from the beginning, and doesn't stand in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaks a lie, he speaks on his own; for he is a liar, and its father.
But because I tell the truth, you don't believe me.
Which of you convicts me of sin? If I tell the truth, why do you not believe me?
He who is of God hears the words of God. For this cause you don't hear, because you are not of God.'
Then the Jews answered him, 'Don't we say well that you are a Samaritan, and have a demon?'
Jesus answered, 'I don't have a demon, but I honor my Father, and you dishonor me.
But I don't seek my own glory. There is one who seeks and judges.
Most certainly, I tell you, if a person keeps my word, he will never see death.'
Then the Jews said to him, 'Now we know that you have a demon. Abraham died, and the prophets; and you say, 'If a man keeps my word, he will never taste of death.'
Are you greater than our father, Abraham, who died? The prophets died. Who do you make yourself out to be?'
Jesus answered, 'If I glorify myself, my glory is nothing. It is my Father who glorifies me, of whom you say that he is our God.
You have not known him, but I know him. If I said, 'I don't know him,' I would be like you, a liar. But I know him, and keep his word.
Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day. He saw it, and was glad.'
The Jews therefore said to him, 'You are not yet fifty years old, and have you seen Abraham?'
Jesus said to them, 'Most certainly, I tell you, before Abraham came into existence, I AM.'
Therefore they took up stones to throw at him, but Jesus was hidden, and went out of the temple, having gone through the midst of them, and so passed by.
Now it happened in those days, that a decree went out from Caesar Augustus that all the world should be enrolled.
This was the first enrollment made when Quirinius was governor of Syria.
All went to enroll themselves, everyone to his own city.
Joseph also went up from Galilee, out of the city of Nazareth, into Judea, to the city of David, which is called Bethlehem, because he was of the house and family of David;
to enroll himself with Mary, who was pledged to be married to him as wife, being pregnant.
It happened, while they were there, that the day had come that she should give birth.
She brought forth her firstborn son, and she wrapped him in bands of cloth, and laid him in a feeding trough, because there was no room for them in the inn.
There were shepherds in the same country staying in the field, and keeping watch by night over their flock.
Behold, an angel of the Lord stood by them, and the glory of the Lord shone around them, and they were terrified.
The angel said to them, 'Don't be afraid, for behold, I bring you good news of great joy which will be to all the people.
For there is born to you, this day, in the city of David, a Savior, who is Christ the Lord.
This is the sign to you: you will find a baby wrapped in strips of cloth, lying in a feeding trough.'
Suddenly, there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly army praising God, and saying,
'Glory to God in the highest, on earth peace, good will toward men.'
It happened, when the angels went away from them into the sky, that the shepherds said one to another, 'Let's go to Bethlehem, now, and see this thing that has happened, which the Lord has made known to us.'
They came with haste, and found both Mary and Joseph, and the baby was lying in the feeding trough.
When they saw it, they publicized widely the saying which was spoken to them about this child.
All who heard it wondered at the things which were spoken to them by the shepherds.
But Mary kept all these sayings, pondering them in her heart.
The shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for all the things that they had heard and seen, just as it was told them.
When eight days were fulfilled for the circumcision of the child, his name was called Jesus, which was given by the angel before he was conceived in the womb.
When the days of their purification according to the law of Moses were fulfilled, they brought him up to Jerusalem, to present him to the Lord
(as it is written in the law of the Lord, 'Every male who opens the womb shall be called holy to the Lord'),
and to offer a sacrifice according to that which is said in the law of the Lord, 'A pair of turtledoves, or two young pigeons.'
Behold, there was a man in Jerusalem whose name was Simeon. This man was righteous and devout, looking for the consolation of Israel, and the Holy Spirit was on him.
It had been revealed to him by the Holy Spirit that he should not see death before he had seen the Lord's Christ.
He came in the Spirit into the temple. When the parents brought in the child, Jesus, that they might do concerning him according to the custom of the law,
then he received him into his arms, and blessed God, and said,
'Now you are releasing your servant, Master, according to your word, in peace;
for my eyes have seen your salvation,
which you have prepared before the face of all peoples;
a light for revelation to the nations, and the glory of your people Israel.'
Joseph and his mother were marveling at the things which were spoken concerning him,
and Simeon blessed them, and said to Mary, his mother, 'Behold, this child is set for the falling and the rising of many in Israel, and for a sign which is spoken against.
Yes, a sword will pierce through your own soul, that the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed.'
There was one Anna, a prophetess, the daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Asher (she was of a great age, having lived with a husband seven years from her virginity,
and she had been a widow for about eighty-four years), who didn't depart from the temple, worshipping with fastings and petitions night and day.
Coming up at that very hour, she gave thanks to the Lord, and spoke of him to all those who were looking for redemption in Jerusalem.
When they had accomplished all things that were according to the law of the Lord, they returned into Galilee, to their own city, Nazareth.
The child was growing, and was becoming strong in spirit, being filled with wisdom, and the grace of God was upon him.
His parents went every year to Jerusalem at the feast of the Passover.
When he was twelve years old, they went up to Jerusalem according to the custom of the feast,
and when they had fulfilled the days, as they were returning, the boy Jesus stayed behind in Jerusalem. Joseph and his mother didn't know it,
but supposing him to be in the company, they went a day's journey, and they looked for him among their relatives and acquaintances.
When they didn't find him, they returned to Jerusalem, looking for him.
It happened after three days they found him in the temple, sitting in the midst of the teachers, both listening to them, and asking them questions.
All who heard him were amazed at his understanding and his answers.
When they saw him, they were astonished, and his mother said to him, 'Son, why have you treated us this way? Behold, your father and I were anxiously looking for you.'
He said to them, 'Why were you looking for me? Didn't you know that I must be in my Father's house?'
They didn't understand the saying which he spoke to them.
And he went down with them, and came to Nazareth. He was subject to them, and his mother kept all these sayings in her heart.
And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, and in favor with God and men.
But I say that so long as the heir is a child, he is no different from a bondservant, though he is lord of all;
but is under guardians and stewards until the day appointed by the father.
So we also, when we were children, were held in bondage under the elemental principles of the world.
But when the fullness of the time came, God sent out his Son, born to a woman, born under the law,
that he might redeem those who were under the law, that we might receive the adoption of children.
And because you are children, God sent out the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, 'Abba, Father!'
So you are no longer a bondservant, but a son; and if a son, then an heir of God through Christ.
However at that time, not knowing God, you were in bondage to those who by nature are not gods.
But now that you have come to know God, or rather to be known by God, why do you turn back again to the weak and miserable elemental principles, to which you desire to be in bondage all over again?
You observe days, months, seasons, and years.
I am afraid for you, that I might have wasted my labor for you.
I beg you, brothers, become as I am, for I also have become as you are. You did me no wrong,
but you know that because of weakness of the flesh I preached the Good News to you the first time.
That which was a temptation to you in my flesh, you didn't despise nor reject; but you received me as an angel of God, even as Christ Jesus.
What was the blessing you enjoyed? For I testify to you that, if possible, you would have plucked out your eyes and given them to me.
So then, have I become your enemy by telling you the truth?
They zealously seek you in no good way. No, they desire to alienate you, that you may seek them.
But it is always good to be zealous in a good cause, and not only when I am present with you.
My little children, of whom I am again in travail until Christ is formed in you--
but I could wish to be present with you now, and to change my tone, for I am perplexed about you.
Tell me, you that desire to be under the law, don't you listen to the law?
For it is written that Abraham had two sons, one by the handmaid, and one by the free woman.
However, the son by the handmaid was born according to the flesh, but the son by the free woman was born through promise.
These things contain an allegory, for these are two covenants. One is from Mount Sinai, bearing children to bondage, which is Hagar.
For this Hagar is Mount Sinai in Arabia, and answers to the Jerusalem that exists now, for she is in bondage with her children.
But the Jerusalem that is above is free, which is the mother of us all.
For it is written, 'Rejoice, you barren who don't bear. Break forth and shout, you that don't travail. For more are the children of the desolate than of her who has a husband.'
Now we, brothers, as Isaac was, are children of promise.
But as then, he who was born according to the flesh persecuted him who was born according to the Spirit, so also it is now.
However what does the Scripture say? 'Throw out the handmaid and her son, for the son of the handmaid will not inherit with the son of the free woman.'
So then, brothers, we are not children of a handmaid, but of the free woman.
But say the things which fit sound doctrine,
that older men should be temperate, sensible, sober minded, sound in faith, in love, and in patience:
and that older women likewise be reverent in behavior, not slanderers nor enslaved to much wine, teachers of that which is good;
that they may train the young women to love their husbands, to love their children,
to be sober minded, chaste, workers at home, kind, being in subjection to their own husbands, that God's word may not be blasphemed.
Likewise, exhort the younger men to be sober minded;
in all things showing yourself an example of good works; in your teaching showing integrity, seriousness, incorruptibility,
and soundness of speech that can't be condemned; that he who opposes you may be ashamed, having no evil thing to say about us.
Exhort servants to be in subjection to their own masters, and to be well-pleasing in all things; not contradicting;
not stealing, but showing all good fidelity; that they may adorn the doctrine of God, our Savior, in all things.
For the grace of God has appeared, bringing salvation to all men,
instructing us to the intent that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we would live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world;
looking for the blessed hope and appearing of the glory of our great God and Savior, Jesus Christ;
who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify for himself a people for his own possession, zealous for good works.
Say these things and exhort and reprove with all authority. Let no man despise you.
Don't rebuke an older man, but exhort him as a father; the younger men as brothers;
the elder women as mothers; the younger as sisters, in all purity.
Honor widows who are widows indeed.
But if any widow has children or grandchildren, let them learn first to show piety towards their own family, and to repay their parents, for this is acceptable in the sight of God.
Now she who is a widow indeed, and desolate, has her hope set on God, and continues in petitions and prayers night and day.
But she who gives herself to pleasure is dead while she lives.
Also command these things, that they may be without reproach.
But if anyone doesn't provide for his own, and especially his own household, he has denied the faith, and is worse than an unbeliever.
Let no one be enrolled as a widow under sixty years old, having been the wife of one man,
being approved by good works, if she has brought up children, if she has been hospitable to strangers, if she has washed the saints' feet, if she has relieved the afflicted, and if she has diligently followed every good work.
But refuse younger widows, for when they have grown wanton against Christ, they desire to marry;
having condemnation, because they have rejected their first pledge.
Besides, they also learn to be idle, going about from house to house. Not only idle, but also gossips and busybodies, saying things which they ought not.
I desire therefore that the younger widows marry, bear children, rule the household, and give no occasion to the adversary for reviling.
For already some have turned aside after Satan.
If any man or woman who believes has widows, let them relieve them, and don't let the assembly be burdened; that it might relieve those who are widows indeed.
Let the elders who rule well be counted worthy of double honor, especially those who labor in the word and in teaching.
For the Scripture says, 'You shall not muzzle the ox when it treads out the grain.'
Don't receive an accusation against an elder, except at the word of two or three witnesses.
Those who sin, reprove in the sight of all, that the rest also may be in fear.
I command you in the sight of God, and Christ Jesus, and the chosen angels, that you observe these things without prejudice, doing nothing by partiality.
Lay hands hastily on no one, neither be a participant in other men's sins. Keep yourself pure.
Be no longer a drinker of water only, but use a little wine for your stomach's sake and your frequent infirmities.
Some men's sins are evident, preceding them to judgment, and some also follow later.
In the same way also there are good works that are obvious, and those that are otherwise can't be hidden.
After these things I heard something like a loud voice of a great multitude in heaven, saying, 'Hallelujah! Salvation, power, and glory belong to our God:
for true and righteous are his judgments. For he has judged the great prostitute, who corrupted the earth with her sexual immorality, and he has avenged the blood of his servants at her hand.'
A second said, 'Hallelujah! Her smoke goes up forever and ever.'
The twenty-four elders and the four living creatures fell down and worshiped God who sits on the throne, saying, 'Amen! Hallelujah!'
A voice came forth from the throne, saying, 'Give praise to our God, all you his servants, you who fear him, the small and the great!'
I heard something like the voice of a great multitude, and like the voice of many waters, and like the voice of mighty thunders, saying, 'Hallelujah! For the Lord our God, the Almighty, reigns!
Let us rejoice and be exceedingly glad, and let us give the glory to him. For the marriage of the Lamb has come, and his wife has made herself ready.'
It was given to her that she would array herself in bright, pure, fine linen: for the fine linen is the righteous acts of the saints.
He said to me, 'Write, 'Blessed are those who are invited to the marriage supper of the Lamb.'' He said to me, 'These are true words of God.'
I fell down before his feet to worship him. He said to me, 'Look! Don't do it! I am a fellow bondservant with you and with your brothers who hold the testimony of Jesus. Worship God, for the testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of Prophecy.'
I saw the heaven opened, and behold, a white horse, and he who sat on it is called Faithful and True. In righteousness he judges and makes war.
His eyes are a flame of fire, and on his head are many crowns. He has names written and a name written which no one knows but he himself.
He is clothed in a garment sprinkled with blood. His name is called 'The Word of God.'
The armies which are in heaven followed him on white horses, clothed in white, pure, fine linen.
Out of his mouth proceeds a sharp, double-edged sword, that with it he should strike the nations. He will rule them with an iron rod. He treads the winepress of the fierceness of the wrath of God, the Almighty.
He has on his garment and on his thigh a name written, 'KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS.'
I saw an angel standing in the sun. He cried with a loud voice, saying to all the birds that fly in the sky, 'Come! Be gathered together to the great supper of God,
that you may eat the flesh of kings, the flesh of captains, the flesh of mighty men, and the flesh of horses and of those who sit on them, and the flesh of all men, both free and slave, and small and great.'
I saw the beast, and the kings of the earth, and their armies, gathered together to make war against him who sat on the horse, and against his army.
The beast was taken, and with him the false prophet who worked the signs in his sight, with which he deceived those who had received the mark of the beast and those who worshiped his image. These two were thrown alive into the lake of fire that burns with sulfur.
The rest were killed with the sword of him who sat on the horse, the sword which came forth out of his mouth. All the birds were filled with their flesh.
Working together, we entreat also that you not receive the grace of God in vain,
for he says, 'At an acceptable time I listened to you, in a day of salvation I helped you.' Behold, now is the acceptable time. Behold, now is the day of salvation.
We give no occasion of stumbling in anything, that our service may not be blamed,
but in everything commending ourselves, as servants of God, in great endurance, in afflictions, in hardships, in distresses,
in beatings, in imprisonments, in riots, in labors, in watchings, in fastings;
in pureness, in knowledge, in patience, in kindness, in the Holy Spirit, in sincere love,
in the word of truth, in the power of God; by the armor of righteousness on the right hand and on the left,
by glory and dishonor, by evil report and good report; as deceivers, and yet true;
as unknown, and yet well known; as dying, and behold, we live; as punished, and not killed;
as sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich; as having nothing, and yet possessing all things.
Our mouth is open to you, Corinthians. Our heart is enlarged.
You are not restricted by us, but you are restricted by your own affections.
Now in return, I speak as to my children, you also be open wide.
Don't be unequally yoked with unbelievers, for what fellowship have righteousness and iniquity? Or what fellowship has light with darkness?
What agreement has Christ with Belial? Or what portion has a believer with an unbeliever?
What agreement has a temple of God with idols? For you are a temple of the living God. Even as God said, 'I will dwell in them, and walk in them; and I will be their God, and they will be my people.'
Therefore, ''Come out from among them, and be separate,' says the Lord. 'Touch no unclean thing. I will receive you.
I will be to you a Father. You will be to me sons and daughters,' says the Lord Almighty.'
Having therefore these promises, beloved, let us cleanse ourselves from all defilement of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.
Open your hearts to us. We wronged no one. We corrupted no one. We took advantage of no one.
I say this not to condemn you, for I have said before, that you are in our hearts to die together and live together.
Great is my boldness of speech toward you. Great is my boasting on your behalf. I am filled with comfort. I overflow with joy in all our affliction.
For even when we had come into Macedonia, our flesh had no relief, but we were afflicted on every side. Fightings were outside. Fear was inside.
Nevertheless, he who comforts the lowly, God, comforted us by the coming of Titus;
and not by his coming only, but also by the comfort with which he was comforted in you, while he told us of your longing, your mourning, and your zeal for me; so that I rejoiced still more.
For though I made you sorry with my letter, I do not regret it, though I did regret it. For I see that my letter made you sorry, though just for a while.
I now rejoice, not that you were made sorry, but that you were made sorry to repentance. For you were made sorry in a godly way, that you might suffer loss by us in nothing.
For godly sorrow works repentance to salvation, which brings no regret. But the sorrow of the world works death.
For behold, this same thing, that you were made sorry in a godly way, what earnest care it worked in you. Yes, what defense, indignation, fear, longing, zeal, and vengeance! In everything you demonstrated yourselves to be pure in the matter.
So although I wrote to you, I wrote not for his cause that did the wrong, nor for his cause that suffered the wrong, but that your earnest care for us might be revealed in you in the sight of God.
Therefore we have been comforted. In our comfort we rejoiced the more exceedingly for the joy of Titus, because his spirit has been refreshed by you all.
For if in anything I have boasted to him on your behalf, I was not disappointed. But as we spoke all things to you in truth, so our glorying also which I made before Titus was found to be truth.
His affection is more abundantly toward you, while he remembers all of your obedience, how with fear and trembling you received him.
I rejoice that in everything I am of good courage concerning you.
After these things, I saw another angel coming down out of the sky, having great authority. The earth was illuminated with his glory.
He cried with a mighty voice, saying, 'Fallen, fallen is Babylon the great, and she has become a habitation of demons, a prison of every unclean spirit, and a prison of every unclean and hateful bird!
For all the nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her sexual immorality, the kings of the earth committed sexual immorality with her, and the merchants of the earth grew rich from the abundance of her luxury.'
I heard another voice from heaven, saying, 'Come out of her, my people, that you have no participation in her sins, and that you don't receive of her plagues,
for her sins have reached to the sky, and God has remembered her iniquities.
Return to her just as she returned, and repay her double as she did, and according to her works. In the cup which she mixed, mix to her double.
However much she glorified herself, and grew wanton, so much give her of torment and mourning. For she says in her heart, 'I sit a queen, and am no widow, and will in no way see mourning.'
Therefore in one day her plagues will come: death, mourning, and famine; and she will be utterly burned with fire; for the Lord God who has judged her is strong.
The kings of the earth, who committed sexual immorality and lived wantonly with her, will weep and wail over her, when they look at the smoke of her burning,
standing far away for the fear of her torment, saying, 'Woe, woe, the great city, Babylon, the strong city! For your judgment has come in one hour.'
The merchants of the earth weep and mourn over her, for no one buys their merchandise any more;
merchandise of gold, silver, precious stones, pearls, fine linen, purple, silk, scarlet, all expensive wood, every vessel of ivory, every vessel made of most precious wood, and of brass, and iron, and marble;
and cinnamon, incense, perfume, frankincense, wine, olive oil, fine flour, wheat, sheep, horses, chariots, and people's bodies and souls.
The fruits which your soul lusted after have been lost to you, and all things that were dainty and sumptuous have perished from you, and you will find them no more at all.
The merchants of these things, who were made rich by her, will stand far away for the fear of her torment, weeping and mourning;
saying, 'Woe, woe, the great city, she who was dressed in fine linen, purple, and scarlet, and decked with gold and precious stones and pearls!
For in an hour such great riches are made desolate.' Every shipmaster, and everyone who sails anywhere, and mariners, and as many as gain their living by sea, stood far away,
and cried out as they looked at the smoke of her burning, saying, 'What is like the great city?'
They cast dust on their heads, and cried, weeping and mourning, saying, 'Woe, woe, the great city, in which all who had their ships in the sea were made rich by reason of her great wealth!' For in one hour is she made desolate.
'Rejoice over her, O heaven, you saints, apostles, and prophets; for God has judged your judgment on her.'
A mighty angel took up a stone like a great millstone and cast it into the sea, saying, 'Thus with violence will Babylon, the great city, be thrown down, and will be found no more at all.
The voice of harpists, minstrels, flute players, and trumpeters will be heard no more at all in you. No craftsman, of whatever craft, will be found any more at all in you. The sound of a mill will be heard no more at all in you.
The light of a lamp will shine no more at all in you. The voice of the bridegroom and of the bride will be heard no more at all in you; for your merchants were the princes of the earth; for with your sorcery all the nations were deceived.
In her was found the blood of prophets and of saints, and of all who have been slain on the earth.'
Stand firm therefore in the liberty by which Christ has made us free, and don't be entangled again with a yoke of bondage.
Behold, I, Paul, tell you that if you receive circumcision, Christ will profit you nothing.
Yes, I testify again to every man who receives circumcision, that he is a debtor to do the whole law.
You are alienated from Christ, you who desire to be justified by the law. You have fallen away from grace.
For we, through the Spirit, by faith wait for the hope of righteousness.
For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision amounts to anything, nor uncircumcision, but faith working through love.
You were running well! Who interfered with you that you should not obey the truth?
This persuasion is not from him who calls you.
A little yeast grows through the whole lump.
I have confidence toward you in the Lord that you will think no other way. But he who troubles you will bear his judgment, whoever he is.
But I, brothers, if I still preach circumcision, why am I still persecuted? Then the stumbling block of the cross has been removed.
I wish that those who disturb you would cut themselves off.
For you, brothers, were called for freedom. Only don't use your freedom for gain to the flesh, but through love be servants to one another.
For the whole law is fulfilled in one word, in this: 'You shall love your neighbor as yourself.'
But if you bite and devour one another, be careful that you don't consume one another.
But I say, walk by the Spirit, and you won't fulfill the lust of the flesh.
For the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh; and these are contrary to one another, that you may not do the things that you desire.
But if you are led by the Spirit, you are not under the law.
Now the works of the flesh are obvious, which are: adultery, sexual immorality, uncleanness, lustfulness,
idolatry, sorcery, hatred, strife, jealousies, outbursts of anger, rivalries, divisions, heresies,
envyings, murders, drunkenness, orgies, and things like these; of which I forewarn you, even as I also forewarned you, that those who practice such things will not inherit the Kingdom of God.
But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faith,
gentleness, and self-control. Against such things there is no law.
Those who belong to Christ have crucified the flesh with its passions and lusts.
If we live by the Spirit, let's also walk by the Spirit.
Let's not become conceited, provoking one another, and envying one another.
Remind them to be in subjection to rulers and to authorities, to be obedient, to be ready for every good work,
to speak evil of no one, not to be contentious, to be gentle, showing all humility toward all men.
For we were also once foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving various lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful, and hating one another.
But when the kindness of God our Savior and his love toward mankind appeared,
not by works of righteousness, which we did ourselves, but according to his mercy, he saved us, through the washing of regeneration and renewing by the Holy Spirit,
whom he poured out on us richly, through Jesus Christ our Savior;
that, being justified by his grace, we might be made heirs according to the hope of eternal life.
This saying is faithful, and concerning these things I desire that you affirm confidently, so that those who have believed God may be careful to maintain good works. These things are good and profitable to men;
but shun foolish questionings, genealogies, strife, and disputes about the law; for they are unprofitable and vain.
Avoid a factious man after a first and second warning;
knowing that such a one is perverted, and sins, being self-condemned.
When I send Artemas to you, or Tychicus, be diligent to come to me to Nicopolis, for I have determined to winter there.
Send Zenas, the lawyer, and Apollos on their journey speedily, that nothing may be lacking for them.
Let our people also learn to maintain good works for necessary uses, that they may not be unfruitful.
All who are with me greet you. Greet those who love us in faith. Grace be with you all. Amen.
But the Spirit says expressly that in later times some will fall away from the faith, paying attention to seducing spirits and doctrines of demons,
through the hypocrisy of men who speak lies, branded in their own conscience as with a hot iron;
forbidding marriage and commanding to abstain from foods which God created to be received with thanksgiving by those who believe and know the truth.
For every creature of God is good, and nothing is to be rejected, if it is received with thanksgiving.
For it is sanctified through the word of God and prayer.
If you instruct the brothers of these things, you will be a good servant of Christ Jesus, nourished in the words of the faith, and of the good doctrine which you have followed.
But refuse profane and old wives' fables. Exercise yourself toward godliness.
For bodily exercise has some value, but godliness has value in all things, having the promise of the life which is now, and of that which is to come.
This saying is faithful and worthy of all acceptance.
For to this end we both labor and suffer reproach, because we have set our trust in the living God, who is the Savior of all men, especially of those who believe.
Command and teach these things.
Let no man despise your youth; but be an example to those who believe, in word, in your way of life, in love, in spirit, in faith, and in purity.
Until I come, pay attention to reading, to exhortation, and to teaching.
Don't neglect the gift that is in you, which was given to you by prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the elders.
Be diligent in these things. Give yourself wholly to them, that your progress may be revealed to all.
Pay attention to yourself, and to your teaching. Continue in these things, for in doing this you will save both yourself and those who hear you.
After these things, Jesus went away to the other side of the sea of Galilee, which is also called the Sea of Tiberias.
A great multitude followed him, because they saw his signs which he did on those who were sick.
Jesus went up into the mountain, and he sat there with his disciples.
Now the Passover, the feast of the Jews, was at hand.
Jesus therefore lifting up his eyes, and seeing that a great multitude was coming to him, said to Philip, 'Where are we to buy bread, that these may eat?'
This he said to test him, for he himself knew what he would do.
Philip answered him, 'Two hundred denarii worth of bread is not sufficient for them, that everyone of them may receive a little.'
One of his disciples, Andrew, Simon Peter's brother, said to him,
'There is a boy here who has five barley loaves and two fish, but what are these among so many?'
Jesus said, 'Have the people sit down.' Now there was much grass in that place. So the men sat down, in number about five thousand.
Jesus took the loaves; and having given thanks, he distributed to the disciples, and the disciples to those who were sitting down; likewise also of the fish as much as they desired.
When they were filled, he said to his disciples, 'Gather up the broken pieces which are left over, that nothing be lost.'
So they gathered them up, and filled twelve baskets with broken pieces from the five barley loaves, which were left over by those who had eaten.
When therefore the people saw the sign which Jesus did, they said, 'This is truly the prophet who comes into the world.'
Jesus therefore, perceiving that they were about to come and take him by force, to make him king, withdrew again to the mountain by himself.
When evening came, his disciples went down to the sea,
and they entered into the boat, and were going over the sea to Capernaum. It was now dark, and Jesus had not come to them.
The sea was tossed by a great wind blowing.
When therefore they had rowed about twenty-five or thirty stadia, and drawing near to the boat; and they were afraid.
But he said to them, 'It is I. Don't be afraid.'
They were willing therefore to receive him into the boat. Immediately the boat was at the land where they were going.
On the next day, the multitude that stood on the other side of the sea saw that there was no other boat there, except the one in which his disciples had embarked, and that Jesus hadn't entered with his disciples into the boat, but his disciples had gone away alone.
However boats from Tiberias came near to the place where they ate the bread after the Lord had given thanks.
When the multitude therefore saw that Jesus wasn't there, nor his disciples, they themselves got into the boats, and came to Capernaum, seeking Jesus.
When they found him on the other side of the sea, they asked him, 'Rabbi, when did you come here?'
Jesus answered them, 'Most certainly I tell you, you seek me, not because you saw signs, but because you ate of the loaves, and were filled.
Don't work for the food which perishes, but for the food which remains to eternal life, which the Son of Man will give to you. For God the Father has sealed him.'
They said therefore to him, 'What must we do, that we may work the works of God?'
Jesus answered them, 'This is the work of God, that you believe in him whom he has sent.'
They said therefore to him, 'What then do you do for a sign, that we may see, and believe you? What work do you do?
Our fathers ate the manna in the wilderness. As it is written, 'He gave them bread out of heaven
Jesus therefore said to them, 'Most certainly, I tell you, it wasn't Moses who gave you the bread out of heaven, but my Father gives you the true bread out of heaven.
For the bread of God is that which comes down out of heaven, and gives life to the world.'
They said therefore to him, 'Lord, always give us this bread.'
Jesus said to them, 'I am the bread of life. He who comes to me will not be hungry, and he who believes in me will never be thirsty.
But I told you that you have seen me, and yet you don't believe.
All those who the Father gives me will come to me. Him who comes to me I will in no way throw out.
For I have come down from heaven, not to do my own will, but the will of him who sent me.
This is the will of my Father who sent me, that of all he has given to me I should lose nothing, but should raise him up at the last day.
This is the will of the one who sent me, that everyone who sees the Son, and believes in him, should have eternal life; and I will raise him up at the last day.'
The Jews therefore murmured concerning him, because he said, 'I am the bread which came down out of heaven.'
They said, 'Isn't this Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we know? How then does he say, 'I have come down out of heaven?''
Therefore Jesus answered them, 'Don't murmur among yourselves.
No one can come to me unless the Father who sent me draws him, and I will raise him up in the last day.
It is written in the prophets, 'They will all be taught by God.' Therefore everyone who hears from the Father, and has learned, comes to me.
Not that anyone has seen the Father, except he who is from God. He has seen the Father.
Most certainly, I tell you, he who believes in me has eternal life.
I am the bread of life.
Your fathers ate the manna in the wilderness, and they died.
This is the bread which comes down out of heaven, that anyone may eat of it and not die.
I am the living bread which came down out of heaven. If anyone eats of this bread, he will live forever. Yes, the bread which I will give for the life of the world is my flesh.'
The Jews therefore contended with one another, saying, 'How can this man give us his flesh to eat?'
Jesus therefore said to them, 'Most certainly I tell you, unless you eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink his blood, you don't have life in yourselves.
He who eats my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day.
For my flesh is food indeed, and my blood is drink indeed.
He who eats my flesh and drinks my blood lives in me, and I in him.
As the living Father sent me, and I live because of the Father; so he who feeds on me, he will also live because of me.
This is the bread which came down out of heaven--not as our fathers ate the manna, and died. He who eats this bread will live forever.'
He said these things in the synagogue, as he taught in Capernaum.
Therefore many of his disciples, when they heard this, said, 'This is a hard saying! Who can listen to it?'
But Jesus knowing in himself that his disciples murmured at this, said to them, 'Does this cause you to stumble?
Then what if you would see the Son of Man ascending to where he was before?
It is the spirit who gives life. The flesh profits nothing. The words that I speak to you are spirit, and are life.
But there are some of you who don't believe.' For Jesus knew from the beginning who they were who didn't believe, and who it was who would betray him.
He said, 'For this cause have I said to you that no one can come to me, unless it is given to him by my Father.'
At this, many of his disciples went back, and walked no more with him.
Jesus said therefore to the twelve, 'You don't also want to go away, do you?'
Simon Peter answered him, 'Lord, to whom would we go? You have the words of eternal life.
We have come to believe and know that you are the Christ, the Son of the living God.'
Jesus answered them, 'Didn't I choose you, the twelve, and one of you is a devil?'
Now he spoke of Judas, the son of Simon Iscariot, for it was he who would betray him, being one of the twelve.
Now in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar, Pontius Pilate being governor of Judea, and Herod being tetrarch of Galilee, and his brother Philip tetrarch of the region of Ituraea and Trachonitis, and Lysanias tetrarch of Abilene,
in the high priesthood of Annas and Caiaphas, the word of God came to John, the son of Zacharias, in the wilderness.
He came into all the region around the Jordan, preaching the baptism of repentance for remission of sins.
As it is written in the book of the words of Isaiah the prophet, 'The voice of one crying in the wilderness, 'Make ready the way of the Lord. Make his paths straight.
Every valley will be filled. Every mountain and hill will be brought low. The crooked will become straight, and the rough ways smooth.
All flesh will see God's salvation.''
He said therefore to the multitudes who went out to be baptized by him, 'You offspring of vipers, who warned you to flee from the wrath to come?
Bring forth therefore fruits worthy of repentance, and don't begin to say among yourselves, 'We have Abraham for our father;' for I tell you that God is able to raise up children to Abraham from these stones!
Even now the axe also lies at the root of the trees. Every tree therefore that doesn't bring forth good fruit is cut down, and thrown into the fire.'
The multitudes asked him, 'What then must we do?'
He answered them, 'He who has two coats, let him give to him who has none. He who has food, let him do likewise.'
Tax collectors also came to be baptized, and they said to him, 'Teacher, what must we do?'
He said to them, 'Collect no more than that which is appointed to you.'
Soldiers also asked him, saying, 'What about us? What must we do?' He said to them, 'Extort from no one by violence, neither accuse anyone wrongfully. Be content with your wages.'
As the people were in expectation, and all men reasoned in their hearts concerning John, whether perhaps he was the Christ,
John answered them all, 'I indeed baptize you with water, but he comes who is mightier than I, the latchet of whose sandals I am not worthy to loosen. He will baptize you in the Holy Spirit and fire,
whose fan is in his hand, and he will thoroughly cleanse his threshing floor, and will gather the wheat into his barn; but he will burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire.'
Then with many other exhortations he preached good news to the people,
but Herod the tetrarch, being reproved by him for Herodias, his brother's wife, and for all the evil things which Herod had done,
added this also to them all, that he shut up John in prison.
Now it happened, when all the people were baptized, Jesus also had been baptized, and was praying. The sky was opened,
and the Holy Spirit descended in a bodily form as a dove on him; and a voice came out of the sky, saying 'You are my beloved Son. In you I am well pleased.'
Jesus himself, when he began to teach, was about thirty years old, being the son (as was supposed) of Joseph, the son of Heli,
the son of Matthat, the son of Levi, the son of Melchi, the son of Jannai, the son of Joseph,
the son of Mattathias, the son of Amos, the son of Nahum, the son of Esli, the son of Naggai,
the son of Maath, the son of Mattathias, the son of Semein, the son of Joseph, the son of Judah,
the son of Joanan, the son of Rhesa, the son of Zerubbabel, the son of Shealtiel, the son of Neri,
the son of Melchi, the son of Addi, the son of Cosam, the son of Elmodam, the son of Er,
the son of Jose, the son of Eliezer, the son of Jorim, the son of Matthat, the son of Levi,
the son of Simeon, the son of Judah, the son of Joseph, the son of Jonan, the son of Eliakim,
the son of Melea, the son of Menan, the son of Mattatha, the son of Nathan, the son of David,
the son of Jesse, the son of Obed, the son of Boaz, the son of Salmon, the son of Nahshon,
the son of Amminadab, the son of Aram, the son of Hezron, the son of Perez, the son of Judah,
the son of Jacob, the son of Isaac, the son of Abraham, the son of Terah, the son of Nahor,
the son of Serug, the son of Reu, the son of Peleg, the son of Eber, the son of Shelah,
the son of Cainan, the son of Arphaxad, the son of Shem, the son of Noah, the son of Lamech,
the son of Methuselah, the son of Enoch, the son of Jared, the son of Mahalaleel, the son of Cainan,
the son of Enos, the son of Seth, the son of Adam, the son of God.
In that hour the disciples came to Jesus, saying, 'Who then is greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven?'
Jesus called a little child to himself, and set him in the midst of them,
and said, 'Most certainly I tell you, unless you turn, and become as little children, you will in no way enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.
Whoever therefore humbles himself as this little child, the same is the greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven.
Whoever receives one such little child in my name receives me,
but whoever causes one of these little ones who believe in me to stumble, it would be better for him that a huge millstone should be hung around his neck, and that he should be sunk in the depths of the sea.
'Woe to the world because of occasions of stumbling! For it must be that the occasions come, but woe to that person through whom the occasion comes!
If your hand or your foot causes you to stumble, cut it off, and cast it from you. It is better for you to enter into life maimed or crippled, rather than having two hands or two feet to be cast into the eternal fire.
If your eye causes you to stumble, pluck it out, and cast it from you. It is better for you to enter into life with one eye, rather than having two eyes to be cast into the Gehenna of fire.
See that you don't despise one of these little ones, for I tell you that in heaven their angels always see the face of my Father who is in heaven.
For the Son of Man came to save that which was lost.
'What do you think? If a man has one hundred sheep, and one of them goes astray, doesn't he leave the ninety-nine, go to the mountains, and seek that which has gone astray?
If he finds it, most certainly I tell you, he rejoices over it more than over the ninety-nine which have not gone astray.
Even so it is not the will of your Father who is in heaven that one of these little ones should perish.
'If your brother sins against you, go, show him his fault between you and him alone. If he listens to you, you have gained back your brother.
But if he doesn't listen, take one or two more with you, that at the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established.
If he refuses to listen to them, tell it to the assembly. If he refuses to hear the assembly also, let him be to you as a Gentile or a tax collector.
Most certainly I tell you, whatever things you bind on earth will have been bound in heaven, and whatever things you release on earth will have been released in heaven.
Again, assuredly I tell you, that if two of you will agree on earth concerning anything that they will ask, it will be done for them by my Father who is in heaven.
For where two or three are gathered together in my name, there I am in the midst of them.'
Then Peter came and said to him, 'Lord, how often shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him? Until seven times?'
Jesus said to him, 'I don't tell you until seven times, but, until seventy times seven.
Therefore the Kingdom of Heaven is like a certain king, who wanted to reconcile accounts with his servants.
When he had begun to reconcile, one was brought to him who owed him ten thousand talents.
But because he couldn't pay, his lord commanded him to be sold, with his wife, his children, and all that he had, and payment to be made.
The servant therefore fell down and kneeled before him, saying, 'Lord, have patience with me, and I will repay you all!'
The lord of that servant, being moved with compassion, released him, and forgave him the debt.
'But that servant went out, and found one of his fellow servants, who owed him one hundred denarii, and he grabbed him, and took him by the throat, saying, 'Pay me what you owe!'
'So his fellow servant fell down at his feet and begged him, saying, 'Have patience with me, and I will repay you!'
He would not, but went and cast him into prison, until he should pay back that which was due.
So when his fellow servants saw what was done, they were exceedingly sorry, and came and told to their lord all that was done.
Then his lord called him in, and said to him, 'You wicked servant! I forgave you all that debt, because you begged me.
Shouldn't you also have had mercy on your fellow servant, even as I had mercy on you?'
His lord was angry, and delivered him to the tormentors, until he should pay all that was due to him.
So my heavenly Father will also do to you, if you don't each forgive your brother from your hearts for his misdeeds.'
Now all the tax collectors and sinners were coming close to him to hear him.
The Pharisees and the scribes murmured, saying, 'This man welcomes sinners, and eats with them.'
He told them this parable.
'Which of you men, if you had one hundred sheep, and lost one of them, wouldn't leave the ninety-nine in the wilderness, and go after the one that was lost, until he found it?
When he has found it, he carries it on his shoulders, rejoicing.
When he comes home, he calls together his friends and his neighbors, saying to them, 'Rejoice with me, for I have found my sheep which was lost!'
I tell you that even so there will be more joy in heaven over one sinner who repents, than over ninety-nine righteous people who need no repentance.
Or what woman, if she had ten drachma coins, if she lost one drachma coin, wouldn't light a lamp, sweep the house, and seek diligently until she found it?
When she has found it, she calls together her friends and neighbors, saying, 'Rejoice with me, for I have found the drachma which I had lost.'
Even so, I tell you, there is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner repenting.'
He said, 'A certain man had two sons.
The younger of them said to his father, 'Father, give me my share of your property.' He divided his livelihood between them.
Not many days after, the younger son gathered all of this together and traveled into a far country. There he wasted his property with riotous living.
When he had spent all of it, there arose a severe famine in that country, and he began to be in need.
He went and joined himself to one of the citizens of that country, and he sent him into his fields to feed pigs.
He wanted to fill his belly with the husks that the pigs ate, but no one gave him any.
But when he came to himself he said, 'How many hired servants of my father's have bread enough to spare, and I'm dying with hunger!
I will get up and go to my father, and will tell him, 'Father, I have sinned against heaven, and in your sight.
I am no more worthy to be called your son. Make me as one of your hired servants.''
'He arose, and came to his father. But while he was still far off, his father saw him, and was moved with compassion, and ran, and fell on his neck, and kissed him.
The son said to him, 'Father, I have sinned against heaven, and in your sight. I am no longer worthy to be called your son.'
'But the father said to his servants, 'Bring out the best robe, and put it on him. Put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet.
Bring the fattened calf, kill it, and let us eat, and celebrate;
for this, my son, was dead, and is alive again. He was lost, and is found.' They began to celebrate.
'Now his elder son was in the field. As he came near to the house, he heard music and dancing.
He called one of the servants to him, and asked what was going on.
He said to him, 'Your brother has come, and your father has killed the fattened calf, because he has received him back safe and healthy.'
But he was angry, and would not go in. Therefore his father came out, and begged him.
But he answered his father, 'Behold, these many years I have served you, and I never disobeyed a commandment of yours, but you never gave me a goat, that I might celebrate with my friends.
But when this, your son, came, who has devoured your living with prostitutes, you killed the fattened calf for him.'
'He said to him, 'Son, you are always with me, and all that is mine is yours.
But it was appropriate to celebrate and be glad, for this, your brother, was dead, and is alive again. He was lost, and is found.''
'Most certainly, I tell you, one who doesn't enter by the door into the sheep fold, but climbs up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber.
But one who enters in by the door is the shepherd of the sheep.
The gatekeeper opens the gate for him, and the sheep listen to his voice. He calls his own sheep by name, and leads them out.
Whenever he brings out his own sheep, he goes before them, and the sheep follow him, for they know his voice.
They will by no means follow a stranger, but will flee from him; for they don't know the voice of strangers.'
Jesus spoke this parable to them, but they didn't understand what he was telling them.
Jesus therefore said to them again, 'Most certainly, I tell you, I am the sheep's door.
All who came before me are thieves and robbers, but the sheep didn't listen to them.
I am the door. If anyone enters in by me, he will be saved, and will go in and go out, and will find pasture.
The thief only comes to steal, kill, and destroy. I came that they may have life, and may have it abundantly.
I am the good shepherd. The good shepherd lays down his life for the sheep.
He who is a hired hand, and not a shepherd, who doesn't own the sheep, sees the wolf coming, leaves the sheep, and flees. The wolf snatches the sheep, and scatters them.
The hired hand flees because he is a hired hand, and doesn't care for the sheep.
I am the good shepherd. I know my own, and I'm known by my own;
even as the Father knows me, and I know the Father. I lay down my life for the sheep.
I have other sheep, which are not of this fold. I must bring them also, and they will hear my voice. They will become one flock with one shepherd.
Therefore the Father loves me, because I lay down my life, that I may take it again.
No one takes it away from me, but I lay it down by myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. I received this commandment from my Father.'
Therefore a division arose again among the Jews because of these words.
Many of them said, 'He has a demon, and is insane! Why do you listen to him?'
Others said, 'These are not the sayings of one possessed by a demon. It isn't possible for a demon to open the eyes of the blind, is it?'
It was the Feast of the Dedication at Jerusalem.
It was winter, and Jesus was walking in the temple, in Solomon's porch.
The Jews therefore came around him and said to him, 'How long will you hold us in suspense? If you are the Christ, tell us plainly.'
Jesus answered them, 'I told you, and you don't believe. The works that I do in my Father's name, these testify about me.
But you don't believe, because you are not of my sheep, as I told you.
My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me.
I give eternal life to them. They will never perish, and no one will snatch them out of my hand.
My Father, who has given them to me, is greater than all. No one is able to snatch them out of my Father's hand.
I and the Father are one.'
Therefore Jews took up stones again to stone him.
Jesus answered them, 'I have shown you many good works from my Father. For which of those works do you stone me?'
The Jews answered him, 'We don't stone you for a good work, but for blasphemy: because you, being a man, make yourself God.'
Jesus answered them, 'Isn't it written in your law, 'I said, you are gods?'
If he called them gods, to whom the word of God came (and the Scripture can't be broken),
do you say of him whom the Father sanctified and sent into the world, 'You blaspheme,' because I said, 'I am the Son of God?'
If I don't do the works of my Father, don't believe me.
But if I do them, though you don't believe me, believe the works; that you may know and believe that the Father is in me, and I in the Father.'
They sought again to seize him, and he went out of their hand.
He went away again beyond the Jordan into the place where John was baptizing at first, and there he stayed.
Many came to him. They said, 'John indeed did no sign, but everything that John said about this man is true.'
Many believed in him there.
I wish that you would bear with me in a little foolishness, but indeed you do bear with me.
For I am jealous over you with a godly jealousy. For I married you to one husband, that I might present you as a pure virgin to Christ.
But I am afraid that somehow, as the serpent deceived Eve in his craftiness, so your minds might be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ.
For if he who comes preaches another Jesus, whom we did not preach, or if you receive a different spirit, which you did not receive, or a different 'good news', which you did not accept, you put up with that well enough.
For I reckon that I am not at all behind the very best apostles.
But though I am unskilled in speech, yet I am not unskilled in knowledge. No, in every way we have been revealed to you in all things.
Or did I commit a sin in humbling myself that you might be exalted, because I preached to you God's Good News free of charge?
I robbed other assemblies, taking wages from them that I might serve you.
When I was present with you and was in need, I wasn't a burden on anyone, for the brothers, when they came from Macedonia, supplied the measure of my need. In everything I kept myself from being burdensome to you, and I will continue to do so.
As the truth of Christ is in me, no one will stop me from this boasting in the regions of Achaia.
Why? Because I don't love you? God knows.
But what I do, that I will do, that I may cut off occasion from them that desire an occasion, that in which they boast, they may be found even as we.
For such men are false apostles, deceitful workers, masquerading as Christ's apostles.
And no wonder, for even Satan masquerades as an angel of light.
It is no great thing therefore if his servants also masquerade as servants of righteousness, whose end will be according to their works.
I say again, let no one think me foolish. But if so, yet receive me as foolish, that I also may boast a little.
That which I speak, I don't speak according to the Lord, but as in foolishness, in this confidence of boasting.
Seeing that many boast after the flesh, I will also boast.
For you bear with the foolish gladly, being wise.
For you bear with a man, if he brings you into bondage, if he devours you, if he takes you captive, if he exalts himself, if he strikes you on the face.
I speak by way of disparagement, as though we had been weak. Yet however any is bold (I speak in foolishness), I am bold also.
Are they Hebrews? So am I. Are they Israelites? So am I. Are they the seed of Abraham? So am I.
Are they servants of Christ? (I speak as one beside himself) I am more so; in labors more abundantly, in prisons more abundantly, in stripes above measure, in deaths often.
Five times from the Jews I received forty stripes minus one.
Three times I was beaten with rods. Once I was stoned. Three times I suffered shipwreck. I have been a night and a day in the deep.
I have been in travels often, perils of rivers, perils of robbers, perils from my countrymen, perils from the Gentiles, perils in the city, perils in the wilderness, perils in the sea, perils among false brothers;
in labor and travail, in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, and in cold and nakedness.
Besides those things that are outside, there is that which presses on me daily, anxiety for all the assemblies.
Who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is caused to stumble, and I don't burn with indignation?
If I must boast, I will boast of the things that concern my weakness.
The God and Father of the Lord Jesus Christ, he who is blessed forevermore, knows that I don't lie.
In Damascus the governor under Aretas the king guarded the city of the Damascenes desiring to arrest me.
Through a window I was let down in a basket by the wall, and escaped his hands.
Finally then, brothers, we beg and exhort you in the Lord Jesus, that as you received from us how you ought to walk and to please God, that you abound more and more.
For you know what instructions we gave you through the Lord Jesus.
For this is the will of God: your sanctification, that you abstain from sexual immorality,
that each one of you know how to possess himself of his own vessel in sanctification and honor,
not in the passion of lust, even as the Gentiles who don't know God;
that no one should take advantage of and wrong a brother or sister in this matter; because the Lord is an avenger in all these things, as also we forewarned you and testified.
For God called us not for uncleanness, but in sanctification.
Therefore he who rejects this doesn't reject man, but God, who has also given his Holy Spirit to you.
But concerning brotherly love, you have no need that one write to you. For you yourselves are taught by God to love one another,
for indeed you do it toward all the brothers who are in all Macedonia. But we exhort you, brothers, that you abound more and more;
and that you make it your ambition to lead a quiet life, and to do your own business, and to work with your own hands, even as we instructed you;
that you may walk properly toward those who are outside, and may have need of nothing.
But we don't want you to be ignorant, brothers, concerning those who have fallen asleep, so that you don't grieve like the rest, who have no hope.
For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so God will bring with him those who have fallen asleep in Jesus.
For this we tell you by the word of the Lord, that we who are alive, who are left to the coming of the Lord, will in no way precede those who have fallen asleep.
For the Lord himself will descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with God's trumpet. The dead in Christ will rise first,
then we who are alive, who are left, will be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air. So we will be with the Lord forever.
Therefore comfort one another with these words.
Therefore we ought to pay greater attention to the things that were heard, lest perhaps we drift away.
For if the word spoken through angels proved steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience received a just recompense;
how will we escape if we neglect so great a salvation--which at the first having been spoken through the Lord, was confirmed to us by those who heard;
God also testifying with them, both by signs and wonders, by various works of power, and by gifts of the Holy Spirit, according to his own will?
For he didn't subject the world to come, of which we speak, to angels.
But one has somewhere testified, saying, 'What is man, that you think of him? Or the son of man, that you care for him?
You made him a little lower than the angels. You crowned him with glory and honor.
You have put all things in subjection under his feet.' For in that he subjected all things to him, he left nothing that is not subject to him. But now we don't see all things subjected to him, yet.
But we see him who has been made a little lower than the angels, Jesus, because of the suffering of death crowned with glory and honor, that by the grace of God he should taste of death for everyone.
For it became him, for whom are all things, and through whom are all things, in bringing many children to glory, to make the author of their salvation perfect through sufferings.
For both he who sanctifies and those who are sanctified are all from one, for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brothers,
saying, 'I will declare your name to my brothers. In the midst of the congregation I will sing your praise.'
Again, 'I will put my trust in him.'
Since then the children have shared in flesh and blood, he also himself in like manner partook of the same, that through death he might bring to nothing him who had the power of death, that is, the devil,
and might deliver all of them who through fear of death were all their lifetime subject to bondage.
For most certainly, he doesn't give help to angels, but he gives help to the seed of Abraham.
Therefore he was obligated in all things to be made like his brothers, that he might become a merciful and faithful high priest in things pertaining to God, to make atonement for the sins of the people.
For in that he himself has suffered being tempted, he is able to help those who are tempted.
Now when they had passed through Amphipolis and Apollonia, they came to Thessalonica, where there was a Jewish synagogue.
Paul, as was his custom, went in to them, and for three Sabbath days reasoned with them from the Scriptures,
explaining and demonstrating that the Christ had to suffer and rise again from the dead, and saying, 'This Jesus, whom I proclaim to you, is the Christ.'
Some of them were persuaded, and joined Paul and Silas, of the devout Greeks a great multitude, and not a few of the chief women.
But the unpersuaded Jews took along some wicked men from the marketplace, and gathering a crowd, set the city in an uproar. Assaulting the house of Jason, they sought to bring them out to the people.
When they didn't find them, they dragged Jason and certain brothers before the rulers of the city, crying, 'These who have turned the world upside down have come here also,
whom Jason has received. These all act contrary to the decrees of Caesar, saying that there is another king, Jesus!'
The multitude and the rulers of the city were troubled when they heard these things.
When they had taken security from Jason and the rest, they let them go.
The brothers immediately sent Paul and Silas away by night to Beroea. When they arrived, they went into the Jewish synagogue.
Now these were more noble than those in Thessalonica, in that they received the word with all readiness of the mind, examining the Scriptures daily to see whether these things were so.
Many of them therefore believed; also of the prominent Greek women, and not a few men.
But when the Jews of Thessalonica had knowledge that the word of God was proclaimed by Paul at Beroea also, they came there likewise, agitating the multitudes.
Then the brothers immediately sent out Paul to go as far as to the sea, and Silas and Timothy still stayed there.
But those who escorted Paul brought him as far as Athens. Receiving a commandment to Silas and Timothy that they should come to him very quickly, they departed.
Now while Paul waited for them at Athens, his spirit was provoked within him as he saw the city full of idols.
So he reasoned in the synagogue with the Jews and the devout persons, and in the marketplace every day with those who met him.
Some of the Epicurean and Stoic philosophers also were conversing with him. Some said, 'What does this babbler want to say?' Others said, 'He seems to be advocating foreign deities,' because he preached Jesus and the resurrection.
They took hold of him, and brought him to the Areopagus, saying, 'May we know what this new teaching is, which is spoken by you?
For you bring certain strange things to our ears. We want to know therefore what these things mean.'
Now all the Athenians and the strangers living there spent their time in nothing else, but either to tell or to hear some new thing.
Paul stood in the middle of the Areopagus, and said, 'You men of Athens, I perceive that you are very religious in all things.
For as I passed along, and observed the objects of your worship, I found also an altar with this inscription: 'TO AN UNKNOWN GOD.' What therefore you worship in ignorance, this I announce to you.
The God who made the world and all things in it, he, being Lord of heaven and earth, doesn't dwell in temples made with hands,
neither is he served by men's hands, as though he needed anything, seeing he himself gives to all life and breath, and all things.
He made from one blood every nation of men to dwell on all the surface of the earth, having determined appointed seasons, and the boundaries of their dwellings,
that they should seek the Lord, if perhaps they might reach out for him and find him, though he is not far from each one of us.
'For in him we live, and move, and have our being.' As some of your own poets have said, 'For we are also his offspring.'
Being then the offspring of God, we ought not to think that the Divine Nature is like gold, or silver, or stone, engraved by art and design of man.
The times of ignorance therefore God overlooked. But now he commands that all people everywhere should repent,
because he has appointed a day in which he will judge the world in righteousness by the man whom he has ordained; of which he has given assurance to all men, in that he has raised him from the dead.'
Now when they heard of the resurrection of the dead, some mocked; but others said, 'We want to hear you again concerning this.'
Thus Paul went out from among them.
But certain men joined with him, and believed, among whom also was Dionysius the Areopagite, and a woman named Damaris, and others with them.
He showed me a river of water of life, clear as crystal, proceeding out of the throne of God and of the Lamb,
in the middle of its street. On this side of the river and on that was the tree of life, bearing twelve kinds of fruits, yielding its fruit every month. The leaves of the tree were for the healing of the nations.
There will be no curse any more. The throne of God and of the Lamb will be in it, and his servants serve him.
They will see his face, and his name will be on their foreheads.
There will be no night, and they need no lamp light; for the Lord God will illuminate them. They will reign forever and ever.
He said to me, 'These words are faithful and true. The Lord God of the spirits of the prophets sent his angel to show to his bondservants the things which must happen soon.'
'Behold, I come quickly. Blessed is he who keeps the words of the prophecy of this book.'
Now I, John, am the one who heard and saw these things. When I heard and saw, I fell down to worship before the feet of the angel who had shown me these things.
He said to me, 'See you don't do it! I am a fellow bondservant with you and with your brothers, the prophets, and with those who keep the words of this book. Worship God.'
He said to me, 'Don't seal up the words of the prophecy of this book, for the time is at hand.
He who acts unjustly, let him act unjustly still. He who is filthy, let him be filthy still. He who is righteous, let him do righteousness still. He who is holy, let him be holy still.'
'Behold, I come quickly. My reward is with me, to repay to each man according to his work.
I am the Alpha and the Omega, the First and the Last, the Beginning and the End.
Blessed are those who do his commandments, that they may have the right to the tree of life, and may enter in by the gates into the city.
Outside are the dogs, the sorcerers, the sexually immoral, the murderers, the idolaters, and everyone who loves and practices falsehood.
I, Jesus, have sent my angel to testify these things to you for the assemblies. I am the root and the offspring of David; the Bright and Morning Star.'
The Spirit and the bride say, 'Come!' He who hears, let him say, 'Come!' He who is thirsty, let him come. He who desires, let him take the water of life freely.
I testify to everyone who hears the words of the prophecy of this book, if anyone adds to them, may God add to him the plagues which are written in this book.
If anyone takes away from the words of the book of this prophecy, may God take away his part from the tree of life, and out of the holy city, which are written in this book.
He who testifies these things says, 'Yes, I come quickly.' Amen! Yes, come, Lord Jesus.
The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with all the saints. Amen.
The first book I wrote, Theophilus, concerned all that Jesus began both to do and to teach,
until the day in which he was received up, after he had given commandment through the Holy Spirit to the apostles whom he had chosen.
To these he also showed himself alive after he suffered, by many proofs, appearing to them over a period of forty days, and speaking about God's Kingdom.
Being assembled together with them, he commanded them, 'Don't depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the promise of the Father, which you heard from me.
For John indeed baptized in water, but you will be baptized in the Holy Spirit not many days from now.'
Therefore, when they had come together, they asked him, 'Lord, are you now restoring the kingdom to Israel?'
He said to them, 'It isn't for you to know times or seasons which the Father has set within his own authority.
But you will receive power when the Holy Spirit has come upon you. You will be witnesses to me in Jerusalem, in all Judea and Samaria, and to the uttermost parts of the earth.'
When he had said these things, as they were looking, he was taken up, and a cloud received him out of their sight.
While they were looking steadfastly into the sky as he went, behold, two men stood by them in white clothing,
who also said, 'You men of Galilee, why do you stand looking into the sky? This Jesus, who was received up from you into the sky will come back in the same way as you saw him going into the sky.'
Then they returned to Jerusalem from the mountain called Olivet, which is near Jerusalem, a Sabbath day's journey away.
When they had come in, they went up into the upper room, where they were staying; that is Peter, John, James, Andrew, Philip, Thomas, Bartholomew, Matthew, James the son of Alphaeus, Simon the Zealot, and Judas the son of James.
All these with one accord continued steadfastly in prayer and supplication, along with the women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his brothers.
In these days, Peter stood up in the midst of the disciples (and the number of names was about one hundred twenty), and said,
'Brothers, it was necessary that this Scripture should be fulfilled, which the Holy Spirit spoke before by the mouth of David concerning Judas, who was guide to those who took Jesus.
For he was numbered with us, and received his portion in this ministry.
Now this man obtained a field with the reward for his wickedness, and falling headlong, his body burst open, and all his intestines gushed out.
It became known to everyone who lived in Jerusalem that in their language that field was called 'Akeldama,' that is, 'The field of blood.'
For it is written in the book of Psalms, 'Let his habitation be made desolate. Let no one dwell therein;'
'Of the men therefore who have accompanied us all the time that the Lord Jesus went in and out among us,
beginning from the baptism of John, to the day that he was received up from us, of these one must become a witness with us of his resurrection.'
They put forward two, Joseph called Barsabbas, who was surnamed Justus, and Matthias.
They prayed, and said, 'You, Lord, who know the hearts of all men, show which one of these two you have chosen
to take part in this ministry and apostleship from which Judas fell away, that he might go to his own place.'
They drew lots for them, and the lot fell on Matthias, and he was numbered with the eleven apostles.
Jude, a servant of Jesus Christ, and brother of James, to those who are called, sanctified by God the Father, and kept for Jesus Christ:
Mercy to you and peace and love be multiplied.
Beloved, while I was very eager to write to you about our common salvation, I was constrained to write to you exhorting you to contend earnestly for the faith which was once for all delivered to the saints.
For there are certain men who crept in secretly, even those who were long ago written about for this condemnation: ungodly men, turning the grace of our God into lasciviousness, and denying our only Master, God, and Lord, Jesus Christ.
Now I desire to remind you, though you already know this, that the Lord, having saved a people out of the land of Egypt, afterward destroyed those who didn't believe.
Angels who didn't keep their first domain, but deserted their own dwelling place, he has kept in everlasting bonds under darkness for the judgment of the great day.
Even as Sodom and Gomorrah, and the cities around them, having, in the same way as these, given themselves over to sexual immorality and gone after strange flesh, are set forth as an example, suffering the punishment of eternal fire.
Yet in like manner these also in their dreaming defile the flesh, despise authority, and slander celestial beings.
But Michael, the archangel, when contending with the devil and arguing about the body of Moses, dared not bring against him an abusive condemnation, but said, 'May the Lord rebuke you!'
But these speak evil of whatever things they don't know. What they understand naturally, like the creatures without reason, they are destroyed in these things.
Woe to them! For they went in the way of Cain, and ran riotously in the error of Balaam for hire, and perished in Korah's rebellion.
These are hidden rocky reefs in your love feasts when they feast with you, shepherds who without fear feed themselves; clouds without water, carried along by winds; autumn leaves without fruit, twice dead, plucked up by the roots;
wild waves of the sea, foaming out their own shame; wandering stars, for whom the blackness of darkness has been reserved forever.
About these also Enoch, the seventh from Adam, prophesied, saying, 'Behold, the Lord came with ten thousands of his holy ones,
to execute judgment on all, and to convict all the ungodly of all their works of ungodliness which they have done in an ungodly way, and of all the hard things which ungodly sinners have spoken against him.'
These are murmurers and complainers, walking after their lusts (and their mouth speaks proud things), showing respect of persons to gain advantage.
But you, beloved, remember the words which have been spoken before by the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ.
They said to you that 'In the last time there will be mockers, walking after their own ungodly lusts.'
These are they who cause divisions, and are sensual, not having the Spirit.
But you, beloved, keep building up yourselves on your most holy faith, praying in the Holy Spirit.
Keep yourselves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ to eternal life.
On some have compassion, making a distinction,
and some save, snatching them out of the fire with fear, hating even the clothing stained by the flesh.
Now to him who is able to keep them from stumbling, and to present you faultless before the presence of his glory in great joy,
to God our Savior, who alone is wise, be glory and majesty, dominion and power, both now and forever. Amen.
Jesus answered and spoke again in parables to them, saying,
'The Kingdom of Heaven is like a certain king, who made a marriage feast for his son,
and sent out his servants to call those who were invited to the marriage feast, but they would not come.
Again he sent out other servants, saying, 'Tell those who are invited, 'Behold, I have made ready my dinner. My cattle and my fatlings are killed, and all things are ready. Come to the marriage feast!''
But they made light of it, and went their ways, one to his own farm, another to his merchandise,
and the rest grabbed his servants, and treated them shamefully, and killed them.
When the king heard that, he was angry, and sent his armies, destroyed those murderers, and burned their city.
'Then he said to his servants, 'The wedding is ready, but those who were invited weren't worthy.
Go therefore to the intersections of the highways, and as many as you may find, invite to the marriage feast.'
Those servants went out into the highways, and gathered together as many as they found, both bad and good. The wedding was filled with guests.
But when the king came in to see the guests, he saw there a man who didn't have on wedding clothing,
and he said to him, 'Friend, how did you come in here not wearing wedding clothing?' He was speechless.
Then the king said to the servants, 'Bind him hand and foot, take him away, and throw him into the outer darkness; there is where the weeping and grinding of teeth will be.'
For many are called, but few chosen.'
Then the Pharisees went and took counsel how they might entrap him in his talk.
They sent their disciples to him, along with the Herodians, saying, 'Teacher, we know that you are honest, and teach the way of God in truth, no matter who you teach, for you aren't partial to anyone.
Tell us therefore, what do you think? Is it lawful to pay taxes to Caesar, or not?'
But Jesus perceived their wickedness, and said, 'Why do you test me, you hypocrites?
Show me the tax money.' They brought to him a denarius.
He asked them, 'Whose is this image and inscription?'
They said to him, 'Caesar's.' Then he said to them, 'Give therefore to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's.'
When they heard it, they marveled, and left him, and went away.
On that day Sadducees (those who say that there is no resurrection) came to him. They asked him,
saying, 'Teacher, Moses said, 'If a man dies, having no children, his brother shall marry his wife, and raise up seed for his brother.'
Now there were with us seven brothers. The first married and died, and having no seed left his wife to his brother.
In like manner the second also, and the third, to the seventh.
After them all, the woman died.
In the resurrection therefore, whose wife will she be of the seven? For they all had her.'
But Jesus answered them, 'You are mistaken, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God.
For in the resurrection they neither marry, nor are given in marriage, but are like God's angels in heaven.
But concerning the resurrection of the dead, haven't you read that which was spoken to you by God, saying,
'I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob?' God is not the God of the dead, but of the living.'
When the multitudes heard it, they were astonished at his teaching.
But the Pharisees, when they heard that he had silenced the Sadducees, gathered themselves together.
One of them, a lawyer, asked him a question, testing him.
'Teacher, which is the greatest commandment in the law?'
Jesus said to him, ''You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, with all your soul, and with all your mind.'
This is the first and great commandment.
A second likewise is this, 'You shall love your neighbor as yourself.'
The whole law and the prophets depend on these two commandments.'
Now while the Pharisees were gathered together, Jesus asked them a question,
saying, 'What do you think of the Christ? Whose son is he?' They said to him, 'Of David.'
He said to them, 'How then does David in the Spirit call him Lord, saying,
'The Lord said to my Lord, sit on my right hand, until I make your enemies a footstool for your feet?'
'If then David calls him Lord, how is he his son?'
No one was able to answer him a word, neither did any man dare ask him any more questions from that day forth.
I saw, and behold, the Lamb standing on Mount Zion, and with him a number, one hundred forty-four thousand, having his name, and the name of his Father, written on their foreheads.
I heard a sound from heaven, like the sound of many waters, and like the sound of a great thunder. The sound which I heard was like that of harpists playing on their harps.
They sing a new song before the throne, and before the four living creatures and the elders. No one could learn the song except the one hundred forty-four thousand, those who had been redeemed out of the earth.
These are those who were not defiled with women, for they are virgins. These are those who follow the Lamb wherever he goes. These were redeemed by Jesus from among men, the first fruits to God and to the Lamb.
In their mouth was found no lie, for they are blameless.
I saw an angel flying in mid heaven, having an eternal Good News to proclaim to those who dwell on the earth, and to every nation, tribe, language, and people.
He said with a loud voice, 'Fear the Lord, and give him glory; for the hour of his judgment has come. Worship him who made the heaven, the earth, the sea, and the springs of waters!'
Another, a second angel, followed, saying, 'Babylon the great has fallen, which has made all the nations to drink of the wine of the wrath of her sexual immorality.'
Another angel, a third, followed them, saying with a great voice, 'If anyone worships the beast and his image, and receives a mark on his forehead, or on his hand,
he also will drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is prepared unmixed in the cup of his anger. He will be tormented with fire and sulfur in the presence of the holy angels, and in the presence of the Lamb.
The smoke of their torment goes up forever and ever. They have no rest day and night, those who worship the beast and his image, and whoever receives the mark of his name.
Here is the patience of the saints, those who keep the commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus.'
I heard the voice from heaven saying, 'Write, 'Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord from now on.'' 'Yes,' says the Spirit, 'that they may rest from their labors; for their works follow with them.'
I looked, and behold, a white cloud; and on the cloud one sitting like a son of man, having on his head a golden crown, and in his hand a sharp sickle.
Another angel came out from the temple, crying with a loud voice to him who sat on the cloud, 'Send forth your sickle, and reap; for the hour to reap has come; for the harvest of the earth is ripe!'
He who sat on the cloud thrust his sickle on the earth, and the earth was reaped.
Another angel came out from the temple which is in heaven. He also had a sharp sickle.
Another angel came out from the altar, he who has power over fire, and he called with a great voice to him who had the sharp sickle, saying, 'Send forth your sharp sickle, and gather the clusters of the vine of the earth, for the earth's grapes are fully ripe!'
The angel thrust his sickle into the earth, and gathered the vintage of the earth, and threw it into the great winepress of the wrath of God.
The winepress was trodden outside of the city, and blood came out from the winepress, even to the bridles of the horses, as far as one thousand six hundred stadia.
For I desire to have you know how greatly I struggle for you, and for those at Laodicea, and for as many as have not seen my face in the flesh;
that their hearts may be comforted, they being knit together in love, and gaining all riches of the full assurance of understanding, that they may know the mystery of God, both of the Father and of Christ,
in whom are all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge hidden.
Now this I say that no one may delude you with persuasiveness of speech.
For though I am absent in the flesh, yet am I with you in the spirit, rejoicing and seeing your order, and the steadfastness of your faith in Christ.
As therefore you received Christ Jesus, the Lord, walk in him,
rooted and built up in him, and established in the faith, even as you were taught, abounding in it in thanksgiving.
Be careful that you don't let anyone rob you through his philosophy and vain deceit, after the tradition of men, after the elements of the world, and not after Christ.
For in him all the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily,
and in him you are made full, who is the head of all principality and power;
in whom you were also circumcised with a circumcision not made with hands, in the putting off of the body of the sins of the flesh, in the circumcision of Christ;
having been buried with him in baptism, in which you were also raised with him through faith in the working of God, who raised him from the dead.
You were dead through your trespasses and the uncircumcision of your flesh. He made you alive together with him, having forgiven us all our trespasses,
wiping out the handwriting in ordinances which was against us; and he has taken it out of the way, nailing it to the cross;
having stripped the principalities and the powers, he made a show of them openly, triumphing over them in it.
Let no man therefore judge you in eating, or in drinking, or with respect to a feast day or a new moon or a Sabbath day,
which are a shadow of the things to come; but the body is Christ's.
Let no one rob you of your prize by a voluntary humility and worshipping of the angels, dwelling in the things which he has not seen, vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind,
and not holding firmly to the Head, from whom all the body, being supplied and knit together through the joints and ligaments, grows with God's growth.
If you died with Christ from the elements of the world, why, as though living in the world, do you subject yourselves to ordinances,
'Don't handle, nor taste, nor touch'
(all of which perish with use), according to the precepts and doctrines of men?
Which things indeed appear like wisdom in self-imposed worship, and humility, and severity to the body; but aren't of any value against the indulgence of the flesh.
Now when Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judea in the days of Herod the king, behold, wise men from the east came to Jerusalem, saying,
'Where is he who is born King of the Jews? For we saw his star in the east, and have come to worship him.'
When Herod the king heard it, he was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him.
Gathering together all the chief priests and scribes of the people, he asked them where the Christ would be born.
They said to him, 'In Bethlehem of Judea, for thus it is written through the prophet,
'You Bethlehem, land of Judah, are in no way least among the princes of Judah: for out of you shall come forth a governor, who shall shepherd my people, Israel.''
Then Herod secretly called the wise men, and learned from them exactly what time the star appeared.
He sent them to Bethlehem, and said, 'Go and search diligently for the young child. When you have found him, bring me word, so that I also may come and worship him.'
They, having heard the king, went their way; and behold, the star, which they saw in the east, went before them, until it came and stood over where the young child was.
When they saw the star, they rejoiced with exceedingly great joy.
They came into the house and saw the young child with Mary, his mother, and they fell down and worshiped him. Opening their treasures, they offered to him gifts: gold, frankincense, and myrrh.
Being warned in a dream that they shouldn't return to Herod, they went back to their own country another way.
Now when they had departed, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a dream, saying, 'Arise and take the young child and his mother, and flee into Egypt, and stay there until I tell you, for Herod will seek the young child to destroy him.'
He arose and took the young child and his mother by night, and departed into Egypt,
and was there until the death of Herod; that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Lord through the prophet, saying, 'Out of Egypt I called my son.'
Then Herod, when he saw that he was mocked by the wise men, was exceedingly angry, and sent out, and killed all the male children who were in Bethlehem and in all the surrounding countryside, from two years old and under, according to the exact time which he had learned from the wise men.
Then that which was spoken by Jeremiah the prophet was fulfilled, saying,
'A voice was heard in Ramah, lamentation, weeping and great mourning, Rachel weeping for her children; she wouldn't be comforted, because they are no more.'
But when Herod was dead, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared in a dream to Joseph in Egypt, saying,
'Arise and take the young child and his mother, and go into the land of Israel, for those who sought the young child's life are dead.'
He arose and took the young child and his mother, and came into the land of Israel.
But when he heard that Archelaus was reigning over Judea in the place of his father, Herod, he was afraid to go there. Being warned in a dream, he withdrew into the region of Galilee,
and came and lived in a city called Nazareth; that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through the prophets: 'He will be called a Nazarene.'
When it happened that we had parted from them and had set sail, we came with a straight course to Cos, and the next day to Rhodes, and from there to Patara.
Having found a ship crossing over to Phoenicia, we went aboard, and set sail.
When we had come in sight of Cyprus, leaving it on the left hand, we sailed to Syria, and landed at Tyre, for there the ship was to unload her cargo.
Having found disciples, we stayed there seven days. These said to Paul through the Spirit, that he should not go up to Jerusalem.
When it happened that we had accomplished the days, we departed and went on our journey. They all, with wives and children, brought us on our way until we were out of the city. Kneeling down on the beach, we prayed.
After saying goodbye to each other, we went on board the ship, and they returned home again.
When we had finished the voyage from Tyre, we arrived at Ptolemais. We greeted the brothers, and stayed with them one day.
On the next day, we, who were Paul's companions, departed, and came to Caesarea. We entered into the house of Philip the evangelist, who was one of the seven, and stayed with him.
Now this man had four virgin daughters who prophesied.
As we stayed there some days, a certain prophet named Agabus came down from Judea.
Coming to us, and taking Paul's belt, he bound his own feet and hands, and said, 'Thus says the Holy Spirit: 'So will the Jews at Jerusalem bind the man who owns this belt, and will deliver him into the hands of the Gentiles.''
When we heard these things, both we and they of that place begged him not to go up to Jerusalem.
Then Paul answered, 'What are you doing, weeping and breaking my heart? For I am ready not only to be bound, but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus.'
When he would not be persuaded, we ceased, saying, 'The Lord's will be done.'
After these days we took up our baggage and went up to Jerusalem.
Some of the disciples from Caesarea also went with us, bringing one Mnason of Cyprus, an early disciple, with whom we would stay.
When we had come to Jerusalem, the brothers received us gladly.
The day following, Paul went in with us to James; and all the elders were present.
When he had greeted them, he reported one by one the things which God had worked among the Gentiles through his ministry.
They, when they heard it, glorified God. They said to him, 'You see, brother, how many thousands there are among the Jews of those who have believed, and they are all zealous for the law.
They have been informed about you, that you teach all the Jews who are among the Gentiles to forsake Moses, telling them not to circumcise their children neither to walk after the customs.
What then? The assembly must certainly meet, for they will hear that you have come.
Therefore do what we tell you. We have four men who have taken a vow.
Take them, and purify yourself with them, and pay their expenses for them, that they may shave their heads. Then all will know that there is no truth in the things that they have been informed about you, but that you yourself also walk keeping the law.
But concerning the Gentiles who believe, we have written our decision that they should observe no such thing, except that they should keep themselves from food offered to idols, from blood, from strangled things, and from sexual immorality.'
Then Paul took the men, and the next day, purified himself and went with them into the temple, declaring the fulfillment of the days of purification, until the offering was offered for every one of them.
When the seven days were almost completed, the Jews from Asia, when they saw him in the temple, stirred up all the multitude and laid hands on him,
crying out, 'Men of Israel, help! This is the man who teaches all men everywhere against the people, and the law, and this place. Moreover, he also brought Greeks into the temple, and has defiled this holy place!'
For they had seen Trophimus, the Ephesian, with him in the city, and they supposed that Paul had brought him into the temple.
All the city was moved, and the people ran together. They seized Paul and dragged him out of the temple. Immediately the doors were shut.
As they were trying to kill him, news came up to the commanding officer of the regiment that all Jerusalem was in an uproar.
Immediately he took soldiers and centurions, and ran down to them. They, when they saw the chief captain and the soldiers, stopped beating Paul.
Then the commanding officer came near, arrested him, commanded him to be bound with two chains, and inquired who he was and what he had done.
Some shouted one thing, and some another, among the crowd. When he couldn't find out the truth because of the noise, he commanded him to be brought into the barracks.
When he came to the stairs, it happened that he was carried by the soldiers because of the violence of the crowd;
for the multitude of the people followed after, crying out, 'Away with him!'
As Paul was about to be brought into the barracks, he asked the commanding officer, 'May I speak to you?' He said, 'Do you know Greek?
Aren't you then the Egyptian, who before these days stirred up to sedition and led out into the wilderness the four thousand men of the Assassins?'
But Paul said, 'I am a Jew, from Tarsus in Cilicia, a citizen of no insignificant city. I beg you, allow me to speak to the people.'
When he had given him permission, Paul, standing on the stairs, beckoned with his hand to the people. When there was a great silence, he spoke to them in the Hebrew language, saying,
He entered and was passing through Jericho.
There was a man named Zacchaeus. He was a chief tax collector, and he was rich.
He was trying to see who Jesus was, and couldn't because of the crowd, because he was short.
He ran on ahead, and climbed up into a sycamore tree to see him, for he was to pass that way.
When Jesus came to the place, he looked up and saw him, and said to him, 'Zacchaeus, hurry and come down, for today I must stay at your house.'
He hurried, came down, and received him joyfully.
When they saw it, they all murmured, saying, 'He has gone in to lodge with a man who is a sinner.'
Zacchaeus stood and said to the Lord, 'Behold, Lord, half of my goods I give to the poor. If I have wrongfully exacted anything of anyone, I restore four times as much.'
Jesus said to him, 'Today, salvation has come to this house, because he also is a son of Abraham.
For the Son of Man came to seek and to save that which was lost.'
As they heard these things, he went on and told a parable, because he was near Jerusalem, and they supposed that the Kingdom of God would be revealed immediately.
He said therefore, 'A certain nobleman went into a far country to receive for himself a kingdom, and to return.
He called ten servants of his, and gave them ten mina coins, and told them, 'Conduct business until I come.'
But his citizens hated him, and sent an envoy after him, saying, 'We don't want this man to reign over us.'
'It happened when he had come back again, having received the kingdom, that he commanded these servants, to whom he had given the money, to be called to him, that he might know what they had gained by conducting business.
The first came before him, saying, 'Lord, your mina has made ten more minas.'
'He said to him, 'Well done, you good servant! Because you were found faithful with very little, you shall have authority over ten cities.'
'The second came, saying, 'Your mina, Lord, has made five minas.'
'So he said to him, 'And you are to be over five cities.'
Another came, saying, 'Lord, behold, your mina, which I kept laid away in a handkerchief,
for I feared you, because you are an exacting man. You take up that which you didn't lay down, and reap that which you didn't sow.'
'He said to him, 'Out of your own mouth will I judge you, you wicked servant! You knew that I am an exacting man, taking up that which I didn't lay down, and reaping that which I didn't sow.
Then why didn't you deposit my money in the bank, and at my coming, I might have earned interest on it?'
He said to those who stood by, 'Take the mina away from him, and give it to him who has the ten minas.'
'They said to him, 'Lord, he has ten minas!'
'For I tell you that to everyone who has, will more be given; but from him who doesn't have, even that which he has will be taken away from him.
But bring those enemies of mine who didn't want me to reign over them here, and kill them before me.''
Having said these things, he went on ahead, going up to Jerusalem.
It happened, when he drew near to Bethsphage and Bethany, at the mountain that is called Olivet, he sent two of his disciples,
saying, 'Go your way into the village on the other side, in which, as you enter, you will find a colt tied, whereon no man ever yet sat. Untie it, and bring it.
If anyone asks you, 'Why are you untying it?' say to him: 'The Lord needs it.''
Those who were sent went away, and found things just as he had told them.
As they were untying the colt, its owners said to them, 'Why are you untying the colt?'
They said, 'The Lord needs it.'
They brought it to Jesus. They threw their cloaks on the colt, and set Jesus on them.
As he went, they spread their cloaks in the way.
As he was now getting near, at the descent of the Mount of Olives, the whole multitude of the disciples began to rejoice and praise God with a loud voice for all the mighty works which they had seen,
saying, 'Blessed is the King who comes in the name of the Lord! Peace in heaven, and glory in the highest!'
Some of the Pharisees from the multitude said to him, 'Teacher, rebuke your disciples!'
He answered them, 'I tell you that if these were silent, the stones would cry out.'
When he drew near, he saw the city and wept over it,
saying, 'If you, even you, had known today the things which belong to your peace! But now, they are hidden from your eyes.
For the days will come on you, when your enemies will throw up a barricade against you, surround you, hem you in on every side,
and will dash you and your children within you to the ground. They will not leave in you one stone on another, because you didn't know the time of your visitation.'
He entered into the temple, and began to drive out those who bought and sold in it,
saying to them, 'It is written, 'My house is a house of prayer,'
He was teaching daily in the temple, but the chief priests and the scribes and the leading men among the people sought to destroy him.
They couldn't find what they might do, for all the people hung on to every word that he said.
At that time, Herod the tetrarch heard the report concerning Jesus,
and said to his servants, 'This is John the Baptizer. He is risen from the dead. That is why these powers work in him.'
For Herod had laid hold of John, and bound him, and put him in prison for the sake of Herodias, his brother Philip's wife.
For John said to him, 'It is not lawful for you to have her.'
When he would have put him to death, he feared the multitude, because they counted him as a prophet.
But when Herod's birthday came, the daughter of Herodias danced among them and pleased Herod.
Whereupon he promised with an oath to give her whatever she should ask.
She, being prompted by her mother, said, 'Give me here on a platter the head of John the Baptizer.'
The king was grieved, but for the sake of his oaths, and of those who sat at the table with him, he commanded it to be given,
and he sent and beheaded John in the prison.
His head was brought on a platter, and given to the young lady: and she brought it to her mother.
His disciples came, and took the body, and buried it; and they went and told Jesus.
Now when Jesus heard this, he withdrew from there in a boat, to a deserted place apart. When the multitudes heard it, they followed him on foot from the cities.
Jesus went out, and he saw a great multitude. He had compassion on them, and healed their sick.
When evening had come, his disciples came to him, saying, 'This place is deserted, and the hour is already late. Send the multitudes away, that they may go into the villages, and buy themselves food.'
But Jesus said to them, 'They don't need to go away. You give them something to eat.'
They told him, 'We only have here five loaves and two fish.'
He said, 'Bring them here to me.'
He commanded the multitudes to sit down on the grass; and he took the five loaves and the two fish, and looking up to heaven, he blessed, broke and gave the loaves to the disciples, and the disciples gave to the multitudes.
They all ate, and were filled. They took up twelve baskets full of that which remained left over from the broken pieces.
Those who ate were about five thousand men, besides women and children.
Immediately Jesus made the disciples get into the boat, and to go ahead of him to the other side, while he sent the multitudes away.
After he had sent the multitudes away, he went up into the mountain by himself to pray. When evening had come, he was there alone.
But the boat was now in the middle of the sea, distressed by the waves, for the wind was contrary.
In the fourth watch of the night,
When the disciples saw him walking on the sea, they were troubled, saying, 'It's a ghost!' and they cried out for fear.
But immediately Jesus spoke to them, saying 'Cheer up! It is I! Don't be afraid.'
Peter answered him and said, 'Lord, if it is you, command me to come to you on the waters.'
He said, 'Come!' Peter stepped down from the boat, and walked on the waters to come to Jesus.
But when he saw that the wind was strong, he was afraid, and beginning to sink, he cried out, saying, 'Lord, save me!'
Immediately Jesus stretched out his hand, took hold of him, and said to him, 'You of little faith, why did you doubt?'
When they got up into the boat, the wind ceased.
Those who were in the boat came and worshiped him, saying, 'You are truly the Son of God!'
When they had crossed over, they came to the land of Gennesaret.
When the people of that place recognized him, they sent into all that surrounding region, and brought to him all who were sick,
and they begged him that they might just touch the fringe of his garment. As many as touched it were made whole.
I commend to you Phoebe, our sister, who is a servant of the assembly that is at Cenchreae,
that you receive her in the Lord, in a way worthy of the saints, and that you assist her in whatever matter she may need from you, for she herself also has been a helper of many, and of my own self.
Greet Prisca and Aquila, my fellow workers in Christ Jesus,
who for my life, laid down their own necks; to whom not only I give thanks, but also all the assemblies of the Gentiles.
Greet the assembly that is in their house. Greet Epaenetus, my beloved, who is the first fruits of Achaia to Christ.
Greet Mary, who labored much for us.
Greet Andronicus and Junias, my relatives and my fellow prisoners, who are notable among the apostles, who also were in Christ before me.
Greet Amplias, my beloved in the Lord.
Greet Urbanus, our fellow worker in Christ, and Stachys, my beloved.
Greet Apelles, the approved in Christ. Greet those who are of the household of Aristobulus.
Greet Herodion, my kinsman. Greet them of the household of Narcissus, who are in the Lord.
Greet Tryphaena and Tryphosa, who labor in the Lord. Greet Persis, the beloved, who labored much in the Lord.
Greet Rufus, the chosen in the Lord, and his mother and mine.
Greet Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermes, Patrobas, Hermas, and the brothers who are with them.
Greet Philologus and Julia, Nereus and his sister, and Olympas, and all the saints who are with them.
Greet one another with a holy kiss. The assemblies of Christ greet you.
Now I beg you, brothers, look out for those who are causing the divisions and occasions of stumbling, contrary to the doctrine which you learned, and turn away from them.
For those who are such don't serve our Lord, Jesus Christ, but their own belly; and by their smooth and flattering speech, they deceive the hearts of the innocent.
For your obedience has become known to all. I rejoice therefore over you. But I desire to have you wise in that which is good, but innocent in that which is evil.
And the God of peace will quickly crush Satan under your feet. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.
Timothy, my fellow worker, greets you, as do Lucius, Jason, and Sosipater, my relatives.
I, Tertius, who write the letter, greet you in the Lord.
Gaius, my host and host of the whole assembly, greets you. Erastus, the treasurer of the city, greets you, as does Quartus, the brother.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all! Amen.



The elder to Gaius the beloved, whom I love in truth.
Beloved, I pray that you may prosper in all things and be healthy, even as your soul prospers.
For I rejoiced greatly, when brothers came and testified about your truth, even as you walk in truth.
I have no greater joy than this, to hear about my children walking in truth.
Beloved, you do a faithful work in whatever you accomplish for those who are brothers and strangers.
They have testified about your love before the assembly. You will do well to send them forward on their journey in a manner worthy of God,
because for the sake of the Name they went out, taking nothing from the Gentiles.
We therefore ought to receive such, that we may be fellow workers for the truth.
I wrote to the assembly, but Diotrephes, who loves to be first among them, doesn't accept what we say.
Therefore, if I come, I will call attention to his deeds which he does, unjustly accusing us with wicked words. Not content with this, neither does he himself receive the brothers, and those who would, he forbids and throws out of the assembly.
Beloved, don't imitate that which is evil, but that which is good. He who does good is of God. He who does evil hasn't seen God.
Demetrius has the testimony of all, and of the truth itself; yes, we also testify, and you know that our testimony is true.
I had many things to write to you, but I am unwilling to write to you with ink and pen;
but I hope to see you soon, and we will speak face to face. Peace be to you. The friends greet you. Greet the friends by name.

Behold, how great a love the Father has bestowed on us, that we should be called children of God! For this cause the world doesn't know us, because it didn't know him.
Beloved, now we are children of God, and it is not yet revealed what we will be. But we know that, when he is revealed, we will be like him; for we will see him just as he is.
Everyone who has this hope set on him purifies himself, even as he is pure.
Everyone who sins also commits lawlessness. Sin is lawlessness.
You know that he was revealed to take away our sins, and in him is no sin.
Whoever remains in him doesn't sin. Whoever sins hasn't seen him, neither knows him.
Little children, let no one lead you astray. He who does righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous.
He who sins is of the devil, for the devil has been sinning from the beginning. To this end the Son of God was revealed, that he might destroy the works of the devil.
Whoever is born of God doesn't commit sin, because his seed remains in him; and he can't sin, because he is born of God.
In this the children of God are revealed, and the children of the devil. Whoever doesn't do righteousness is not of God, neither is he who doesn't love his brother.
For this is the message which you heard from the beginning, that we should love one another;
unlike Cain, who was of the evil one, and killed his brother. Why did he kill him? Because his works were evil, and his brother's righteous.
Don't be surprised, my brothers, if the world hates you.
We know that we have passed out of death into life, because we love the brothers. He who doesn't love his brother remains in death.
Whoever hates his brother is a murderer, and you know that no murderer has eternal life remaining in him.
By this we know love, because he laid down his life for us. And we ought to lay down our lives for the brothers.
But whoever has the world's goods, and sees his brother in need, and closes his heart of compassion against him, how does the love of God remain in him?
My little children, let's not love in word only, neither with the tongue only, but in deed and truth.
And by this we know that we are of the truth, and persuade our hearts before him,
because if our heart condemns us, God is greater than our heart, and knows all things.
Beloved, if our hearts don't condemn us, we have boldness toward God;
and whatever we ask, we receive from him, because we keep his commandments and do the things that are pleasing in his sight.
This is his commandment, that we should believe in the name of his Son, Jesus Christ, and love one another, even as he commanded.
He who keeps his commandments remains in him, and he in him. By this we know that he remains in us, by the Spirit which he gave us.
'To the angel of the assembly in Ephesus write: 'He who holds the seven stars in his right hand, he who walks among the seven golden lampstands says these things:
'I know your works, and your toil and perseverance, and that you can't tolerate evil men, and have tested those who call themselves apostles, and they are not, and found them false.
You have perseverance and have endured for my name's sake, and have not grown weary.
But I have this against you, that you left your first love.
Remember therefore from where you have fallen, and repent and do the first works; or else I am coming to you swiftly, and will move your lampstand out of its place, unless you repent.
But this you have, that you hate the works of the Nicolaitans, which I also hate.
He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies. To him who overcomes I will give to eat of the tree of life, which is in the Paradise of my God.
'To the angel of the assembly in Smyrna write: 'The first and the last, who was dead, and has come to life says these things:
'I know your works, oppression, and your poverty (but you are rich), and the blasphemy of those who say they are Jews, and they are not, but are a synagogue of Satan.
Don't be afraid of the things which you are about to suffer. Behold, the devil is about to throw some of you into prison, that you may be tested; and you will have oppression for ten days. Be faithful to death, and I will give you the crown of life.
He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies. He who overcomes won't be harmed by the second death.
'To the angel of the assembly in Pergamum write: 'He who has the sharp two-edged sword says these things:
'I know your works and where you dwell, where Satan's throne is. You hold firmly to my name, and didn't deny my faith in the days of Antipas my witness, my faithful one, who was killed among you, where Satan dwells.
But I have a few things against you, because you have there some who hold the teaching of Balaam, who taught Balak to throw a stumbling block before the children of Israel, to eat things sacrificed to idols, and to commit sexual immorality.
So you also have some who hold to the teaching of the Nicolaitans likewise.
Repent therefore, or else I am coming to you quickly, and I will make war against them with the sword of my mouth.
He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies. To him who overcomes, to him I will give of the hidden manna, and I will give him a white stone, and on the stone a new name written, which no one knows but he who receives it.
'To the angel of the assembly in Thyatira write: 'The Son of God, who has his eyes like a flame of fire, and his feet are like burnished brass, says these things:
'I know your works, your love, faith, service, patient endurance, and that your last works are more than the first.
But I have this against you, that you tolerate your woman, Jezebel, who calls herself a prophetess. She teaches and seduces my servants to commit sexual immorality, and to eat things sacrificed to idols.
I gave her time to repent, but she refuses to repent of her sexual immorality.
Behold, I will throw her into a bed, and those who commit adultery with her into great oppression, unless they repent of her works.
I will kill her children with Death, and all the assemblies will know that I am he who searches the minds and hearts. I will give to each one of you according to your deeds.
But to you I say, to the rest who are in Thyatira, as many as don't have this teaching, who don't know what some call 'the deep things of Satan,' to you I say, I am not putting any other burden on you.
Nevertheless, hold that which you have firmly until I come.
He who overcomes, and he who keeps my works to the end, to him I will give authority over the nations.
He will rule them with a rod of iron, shattering them like clay pots; as I also have received of my Father:
and I will give him the morning star.
He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies.
For this cause I, Paul, am the prisoner of Christ Jesus on behalf of you Gentiles,
if it is so that you have heard of the administration of that grace of God which was given me toward you;
how that by revelation the mystery was made known to me, as I wrote before in few words,
by which, when you read, you can perceive my understanding in the mystery of Christ;
which in other generations was not made known to the children of men, as it has now been revealed to his holy apostles and prophets in the Spirit;
that the Gentiles are fellow heirs, and fellow members of the body, and fellow partakers of his promise in Christ Jesus through the Good News,
of which I was made a servant, according to the gift of that grace of God which was given me according to the working of his power.
To me, the very least of all saints, was this grace given, to preach to the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ,
and to make all men see what is the administration of the mystery which for ages has been hidden in God, who created all things through Jesus Christ;
to the intent that now through the assembly the manifold wisdom of God might be made known to the principalities and the powers in the heavenly places,
according to the eternal purpose which he purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord;
in whom we have boldness and access in confidence through our faith in him.
Therefore I ask that you may not lose heart at my troubles for you, which are your glory.
For this cause, I bow my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
from whom every family in heaven and on earth is named,
that he would grant you, according to the riches of his glory, that you may be strengthened with power through his Spirit in the inward man;
that Christ may dwell in your hearts through faith; to the end that you, being rooted and grounded in love,
may be strengthened to comprehend with all the saints what is the breadth and length and height and depth,
and to know Christ's love which surpasses knowledge, that you may be filled with all the fullness of God.
Now to him who is able to do exceedingly abundantly above all that we ask or think, according to the power that works in us,
to him be the glory in the assembly and in Christ Jesus to all generations forever and ever. Amen.
The whole company of them rose up and brought him before Pilate.
They began to accuse him, saying, 'We found this man perverting the nation, forbidding paying taxes to Caesar, and saying that he himself is Christ, a king.'
Pilate asked him, 'Are you the King of the Jews?' He answered him, 'So you say.'
Pilate said to the chief priests and the multitudes, 'I find no basis for a charge against this man.'
But they insisted, saying, 'He stirs up the people, teaching throughout all Judea, beginning from Galilee even to this place.'
But when Pilate heard Galilee mentioned, he asked if the man was a Galilean.
When he found out that he was in Herod's jurisdiction, he sent him to Herod, who was also in Jerusalem during those days.
Now when Herod saw Jesus, he was exceedingly glad, for he had wanted to see him for a long time, because he had heard many things about him. He hoped to see some miracle done by him.
He questioned him with many words, but he gave no answers.
The chief priests and the scribes stood, vehemently accusing him.
Herod with his soldiers humiliated him and mocked him. Dressing him in luxurious clothing, they sent him back to Pilate.
Herod and Pilate became friends with each other that very day, for before that they were enemies with each other.
Pilate called together the chief priests and the rulers and the people,
and said to them, 'You brought this man to me as one that perverts the people, and see, I have examined him before you, and found no basis for a charge against this man concerning those things of which you accuse him.
Neither has Herod, for I sent you to him, and see, nothing worthy of death has been done by him.
I will therefore chastise him and release him.'
Now he had to release one prisoner to them at the feast.
But they all cried out together, saying, 'Away with this man! Release to us Barabbas!'--
one who was thrown into prison for a certain revolt in the city, and for murder.
Then Pilate spoke to them again, wanting to release Jesus,
but they shouted, saying, 'Crucify! Crucify him!'
He said to them the third time, 'Why? What evil has this man done? I have found no capital crime in him. I will therefore chastise him and release him.'
But they were urgent with loud voices, asking that he might be crucified. Their voices and the voices of the chief priests prevailed.
Pilate decreed that what they asked for should be done.
He released him who had been thrown into prison for insurrection and murder, for whom they asked, but he delivered Jesus up to their will.
When they led him away, they grabbed one Simon of Cyrene, coming from the country, and laid on him the cross, to carry it after Jesus.
A great multitude of the people followed him, including women who also mourned and lamented him.
But Jesus, turning to them, said, 'Daughters of Jerusalem, don't weep for me, but weep for yourselves and for your children.
For behold, the days are coming in which they will say, 'Blessed are the barren, the wombs that never bore, and the breasts that never nursed.'
Then they will begin to tell the mountains, 'Fall on us!' and tell the hills, 'Cover us.'
For if they do these things in the green tree, what will be done in the dry?'
There were also others, two criminals, led with him to be put to death.
When they came to the place that is called The Skull, they crucified him there with the criminals, one on the right and the other on the left.
Jesus said, 'Father, forgive them, for they don't know what they are doing.' Dividing his garments among them, they cast lots.
The people stood watching. The rulers with them also scoffed at him, saying, 'He saved others. Let him save himself, if this is the Christ of God, his chosen one!'
The soldiers also mocked him, coming to him and offering him vinegar,
and saying, 'If you are the King of the Jews, save yourself!'
An inscription was also written over him in letters of Greek, Latin, and Hebrew: 'THIS IS THE KING OF THE JEWS.'
One of the criminals who was hanged insulted him, saying, 'If you are the Christ, save yourself and us!'
But the other answered, and rebuking him said, 'Don't you even fear God, seeing you are under the same condemnation?
And we indeed justly, for we receive the due reward for our deeds, but this man has done nothing wrong.'
He said to Jesus, 'Lord, remember me when you come into your Kingdom.'
Jesus said to him, 'Assuredly I tell you, today you will be with me in Paradise.'
It was now about the sixth hour
The sun was darkened, and the veil of the temple was torn in two.
Jesus, crying with a loud voice, said, 'Father, into your hands I commit my spirit!' Having said this, he breathed his last.
When the centurion saw what was done, he glorified God, saying, 'Certainly this was a righteous man.'
All the multitudes that came together to see this, when they saw the things that were done, returned home beating their breasts.
All his acquaintances, and the women who followed with him from Galilee, stood at a distance, watching these things.
Behold, a man named Joseph, who was a member of the council, a good and righteous man
(he had not consented to their counsel and deed), from Arimathaea, a city of the Jews, who was also waiting for the Kingdom of God:
this man went to Pilate, and asked for Jesus' body.
He took it down, and wrapped it in a linen cloth, and laid him in a tomb that was cut in stone, where no one had ever been laid.
It was the day of the Preparation, and the Sabbath was drawing near.
The women, who had come with him out of Galilee, followed after, and saw the tomb, and how his body was laid.
They returned, and prepared spices and ointments. On the Sabbath they rested according to the commandment.
James, a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ, to the twelve tribes which are in the Dispersion: Greetings.
Count it all joy, my brothers, when you fall into various temptations,
knowing that the testing of your faith produces endurance.
Let endurance have its perfect work, that you may be perfect and complete, lacking in nothing.
But if any of you lacks wisdom, let him ask of God, who gives to all liberally and without reproach; and it will be given to him.
But let him ask in faith, without any doubting, for he who doubts is like a wave of the sea, driven by the wind and tossed.
For let that man not think that he will receive anything from the Lord.
He is a double-minded man, unstable in all his ways.
But let the brother in humble circumstances glory in his high position;
and the rich, in that he is made humble, because like the flower in the grass, he will pass away.
For the sun arises with the scorching wind, and withers the grass, and the flower in it falls, and the beauty of its appearance perishes. So also will the rich man fade away in his pursuits.
Blessed is the man who endures temptation, for when he has been approved, he will receive the crown of life, which the Lord promised to those who love him.
Let no man say when he is tempted, 'I am tempted by God,' for God can't be tempted by evil, and he himself tempts no one.
But each one is tempted, when he is drawn away by his own lust, and enticed.
Then the lust, when it has conceived, bears sin; and the sin, when it is full grown, brings forth death.
Don't be deceived, my beloved brothers.
Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above, coming down from the Father of lights, with whom can be no variation, nor turning shadow.
Of his own will he brought us forth by the word of truth, that we should be a kind of first fruits of his creatures.
So, then, my beloved brothers, let every man be swift to hear, slow to speak, and slow to anger;
for the anger of man doesn't produce the righteousness of God.
Therefore, putting away all filthiness and overflowing of wickedness, receive with humility the implanted word, which is able to save your souls.
But be doers of the word, and not only hearers, deluding your own selves.
For if anyone is a hearer of the word and not a doer, he is like a man looking at his natural face in a mirror;
for he sees himself, and goes away, and immediately forgets what kind of man he was.
But he who looks into the perfect law of freedom, and continues, not being a hearer who forgets, but a doer of the work, this man will be blessed in what he does.
If anyone among you thinks himself to be religious while he doesn't bridle his tongue, but deceives his heart, this man's religion is worthless.
Pure religion and undefiled before our God and Father is this: to visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep oneself unstained by the world.
Now in those days, when the number of the disciples was multiplying, a complaint arose from the Hellenists against the Hebrews, because their widows were neglected in the daily service.
The twelve summoned the multitude of the disciples and said, 'It is not appropriate for us to forsake the word of God and serve tables.
Therefore select from among you, brothers, seven men of good report, full of the Holy Spirit and of wisdom, whom we may appoint over this business.
But we will continue steadfastly in prayer and in the ministry of the word.'
These words pleased the whole multitude. They chose Stephen, a man full of faith and of the Holy Spirit, Philip, Prochorus, Nicanor, Timon, Parmenas, and Nicolaus, a proselyte of Antioch;
whom they set before the apostles. When they had prayed, they laid their hands on them.
The word of God increased and the number of the disciples multiplied in Jerusalem exceedingly. A great company of the priests were obedient to the faith.
Stephen, full of faith and power, performed great wonders and signs among the people.
But some of those who were of the synagogue called 'The Libertines,' and of the Cyrenians, of the Alexandrians, and of those of Cilicia and Asia arose, disputing with Stephen.
They weren't able to withstand the wisdom and the Spirit by which he spoke.
Then they secretly induced men to say, 'We have heard him speak blasphemous words against Moses and God.'
They stirred up the people, the elders, and the scribes, and came against him and seized him, and brought him in to the council,
and set up false witnesses who said, 'This man never stops speaking blasphemous words against this holy place and the law.
For we have heard him say that this Jesus of Nazareth will destroy this place, and will change the customs which Moses delivered to us.'
All who sat in the council, fastening their eyes on him, saw his face like it was the face of an angel.
'Then the Kingdom of Heaven will be like ten virgins, who took their lamps, and went out to meet the bridegroom.
Five of them were foolish, and five were wise.
Those who were foolish, when they took their lamps, took no oil with them,
but the wise took oil in their vessels with their lamps.
Now while the bridegroom delayed, they all slumbered and slept.
But at midnight there was a cry, 'Behold! The bridegroom is coming! Come out to meet him!'
Then all those virgins arose, and trimmed their lamps.
The foolish said to the wise, 'Give us  some of your oil, for our lamps are going out.'
But the wise answered, saying, 'What if there isn't enough for us and you? You go rather to those who sell, and buy for yourselves.'
While they went away to buy, the bridegroom came, and those who were ready went in with him to the marriage feast, and the door was shut.
Afterward the other virgins also came, saying, 'Lord, Lord, open to us.'
But he answered, 'Most certainly I tell you, I don't know you.'
Watch therefore, for you don't know the day nor the hour in which the Son of Man is coming.
'For it is like a man, going into another country, who called his own servants, and entrusted his goods to them.
To one he gave five talents, to another two, to another one; to each according to his own ability. Then he went on his journey.
Immediately he who received the five talents went and traded with them, and made another five talents.
In like manner he also who got the two gained another two.
But he who received the one went away and dug in the earth, and hid his lord's money.
'Now after a long time the lord of those servants came, and reconciled accounts with them.
He who received the five talents came and brought another five talents, saying, 'Lord, you delivered to me five talents. Behold, I have gained another five talents besides them.'
'His lord said to him, 'Well done, good and faithful servant. You have been faithful over a few things, I will set you over many things. Enter into the joy of your lord.'
'He also who got the two talents came and said, 'Lord, you delivered to me two talents. Behold, I have gained another two talents besides them.'
'His lord said to him, 'Well done, good and faithful servant. You have been faithful over a few things, I will set you over many things. Enter into the joy of your lord.'
'He also who had received the one talent came and said, 'Lord, I knew you that you are a hard man, reaping where you did not sow, and gathering where you did not scatter.
I was afraid, and went away and hid your talent in the earth. Behold, you have what is yours.'
'But his lord answered him, 'You wicked and slothful servant. You knew that I reap where I didn't sow, and gather where I didn't scatter.
You ought therefore to have deposited my money with the bankers, and at my coming I should have received back my own with interest.
Take away therefore the talent from him, and give it to him who has the ten talents.
For to everyone who has will be given, and he will have abundance, but from him who doesn't have, even that which he has will be taken away.
Throw out the unprofitable servant into the outer darkness, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.'
'But when the Son of Man comes in his glory, and all the holy angels with him, then he will sit on the throne of his glory.
Before him all the nations will be gathered, and he will separate them one from another, as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats.
He will set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the left.
Then the King will tell those on his right hand, 'Come, blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world;
for I was hungry, and you gave me food to eat. I was thirsty, and you gave me drink. I was a stranger, and you took me in.
I was naked, and you clothed me. I was sick, and you visited me. I was in prison, and you came to me.'
'Then the righteous will answer him, saying, 'Lord, when did we see you hungry, and feed you; or thirsty, and give you a drink?
When did we see you as a stranger, and take you in; or naked, and clothe you?
When did we see you sick, or in prison, and come to you?'
'The King will answer them, 'Most certainly I tell you, inasmuch as you did it to one of the least of these my brothers, you did it to me.'
Then he will say also to those on the left hand, 'Depart from me, you cursed, into the eternal fire which is prepared for the devil and his angels;
for I was hungry, and you didn't give me food to eat; I was thirsty, and you gave me no drink;
I was a stranger, and you didn't take me in; naked, and you didn't clothe me; sick, and in prison, and you didn't visit me.'
'Then they will also answer, saying, 'Lord, when did we see you hungry, or thirsty, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and didn't help you?'
'Then he will answer them, saying, 'Most certainly I tell you, inasmuch as you didn't do it to one of the least of these, you didn't do it to me.'
These will go away into eternal punishment, but the righteous into eternal life.'
Now there was a certain man in Caesarea, Cornelius by name, a centurion of what was called the Italian Regiment,
a devout man, and one who feared God with all his house, who gave gifts for the needy generously to the people, and always prayed to God.
At about the ninth hour of the day, he clearly saw in a vision an angel of God coming to him, and saying to him, 'Cornelius!'
He, fastening his eyes on him, and being frightened, said, 'What is it, Lord?' He said to him, 'Your prayers and your gifts to the needy have gone up for a memorial before God.
Now send men to Joppa, and get Simon, who is surnamed Peter.
He lodges with one Simon, a tanner, whose house is by the seaside.'
When the angel who spoke to him had departed, Cornelius called two of his household servants and a devout soldier of those who waited on him continually.
Having explained everything to them, he sent them to Joppa.
Now on the next day as they were on their journey, and got close to the city, Peter went up on the housetop to pray at about noon.
He became hungry and desired to eat, but while they were preparing, he fell into a trance.
He saw heaven opened and a certain container descending to him, like a great sheet let down by four corners on the earth,
in which were all kinds of four-footed animals of the earth, wild animals, reptiles, and birds of the sky.
A voice came to him, 'Rise, Peter, kill and eat!'
But Peter said, 'Not so, Lord; for I have never eaten anything that is common or unclean.'
A voice came to him again the second time, 'What God has cleansed, you must not call unclean.'
This was done three times, and immediately the vessel was received up into heaven.
Now while Peter was very perplexed in himself what the vision which he had seen might mean, behold, the men who were sent by Cornelius, having made inquiry for Simon's house, stood before the gate,
and called and asked whether Simon, who was surnamed Peter, was lodging there.
While Peter was pondering the vision, the Spirit said to him, 'Behold, three men seek you.
But arise, get down, and go with them, doubting nothing; for I have sent them.'
Peter went down to the men, and said, 'Behold, I am he whom you seek. Why have you come?'
They said, 'Cornelius, a centurion, a righteous man and one who fears God, and well spoken of by all the nation of the Jews, was directed by a holy angel to invite you to his house, and to listen to what you say.'
So he called them in and lodged them. On the next day Peter arose and went out with them, and some of the brothers from Joppa accompanied him.
On the next day they entered into Caesarea. Cornelius was waiting for them, having called together his relatives and his near friends.
When it happened that Peter entered, Cornelius met him, fell down at his feet, and worshiped him.
But Peter raised him up, saying, 'Stand up! I myself am also a man.'
As he talked with him, he went in and found many gathered together.
He said to them, 'You yourselves know how it is an unlawful thing for a man who is a Jew to join himself or come to one of another nation, but God has shown me that I shouldn't call any man unholy or unclean.
Therefore also I came without complaint when I was sent for. I ask therefore, why did you send for me?'
Cornelius said, 'Four days ago, I was fasting until this hour, and at the ninth hour, I prayed in my house, and behold, a man stood before me in bright clothing,
and said, 'Cornelius, your prayer is heard, and your gifts to the needy are remembered in the sight of God.
Send therefore to Joppa, and summon Simon, who is surnamed Peter. He lodges in the house of Simon a tanner, by the seaside. When he comes, he will speak to you.'
Therefore I sent to you at once, and it was good of you to come. Now therefore we are all here present in the sight of God to hear all things that have been commanded you by God.'
Peter opened his mouth and said, 'Truly I perceive that God doesn't show favoritism;
but in every nation he who fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him.
The word which he sent to the children of Israel, preaching good news of peace by Jesus Christ--he is Lord of all--
that spoken word you yourselves know, which was proclaimed throughout all Judea, beginning from Galilee, after the baptism which John preached;
even Jesus of Nazareth, how God anointed him with the Holy Spirit and with power, who went about doing good and healing all who were oppressed by the devil, for God was with him.
We are witnesses of everything he did both in the country of the Jews, and in Jerusalem; whom they also killed, hanging him on a tree.
God raised him up the third day, and gave him to be revealed,
not to all the people, but to witnesses who were chosen before by God, to us, who ate and drank with him after he rose from the dead.
He commanded us to preach to the people and to testify that this is he who is appointed by God as the Judge of the living and the dead.
All the prophets testify about him, that through his name everyone who believes in him will receive remission of sins.'
While Peter was still speaking these words, the Holy Spirit fell on all those who heard the word.
They of the circumcision who believed were amazed, as many as came with Peter, because the gift of the Holy Spirit was also poured out on the Gentiles.
For they heard them speaking in other languages and magnifying God. Then Peter answered,
'Can any man forbid the water, that these who have received the Holy Spirit as well as we should not be baptized?'
He commanded them to be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ. Then they asked him to stay some days.
The fifth angel sounded, and I saw a star from the sky which had fallen to the earth. The key to the pit of the abyss was given to him.
He opened the pit of the abyss, and smoke went up out of the pit, like the smoke from a burning furnace. The sun and the air were darkened because of the smoke from the pit.
Then out of the smoke came forth locusts on the earth, and power was given to them, as the scorpions of the earth have power.
They were told that they should not hurt the grass of the earth, neither any green thing, neither any tree, but only those people who don't have God's seal on their foreheads.
They were given power not to kill them, but to torment them for five months. Their torment was like the torment of a scorpion, when it strikes a person.
In those days people will seek death, and will in no way find it. They will desire to die, and death will flee from them.
The shapes of the locusts were like horses prepared for war. On their heads were something like golden crowns, and their faces were like people's faces.
They had hair like women's hair, and their teeth were like those of lions.
They had breastplates, like breastplates of iron. The sound of their wings was like the sound of chariots, or of many horses rushing to war.
They have tails like those of scorpions, and stings. In their tails they have power to harm men for five months.
They have over them as king the angel of the abyss. His name in Hebrew is 'Abaddon,'
The first woe is past. Behold, there are still two woes coming after this.
The sixth angel sounded. I heard a voice from the horns of the golden altar which is before God,
saying to the sixth angel who had one trumpet, 'Free the four angels who are bound at the great river Euphrates!'
The four angels were freed who had been prepared for that hour and day and month and year, so that they might kill one third of mankind.
The number of the armies of the horsemen was two hundred million. I heard the number of them.
Thus I saw the horses in the vision, and those who sat on them, having breastplates of fiery red, hyacinth blue, and sulfur yellow; and the heads of lions. Out of their mouths proceed fire, smoke, and sulfur.
By these three plagues were one third of mankind killed: by the fire, the smoke, and the sulfur, which proceeded out of their mouths.
For the power of the horses is in their mouths, and in their tails. For their tails are like serpents, and have heads, and with them they harm.
The rest of mankind, who were not killed with these plagues, didn't repent of the works of their hands, that they wouldn't worship demons, and the idols of gold, and of silver, and of brass, and of stone, and of wood; which can neither see, nor hear, nor walk.
They didn't repent of their murders, nor of their sorceries, nor of their sexual immorality, nor of their thefts.
For every high priest, being taken from among men, is appointed for men in things pertaining to God, that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins.
The high priest can deal gently with those who are ignorant and going astray, because he himself is also surrounded with weakness.
Because of this, he must offer sacrifices for sins for the people, as well as for himself.
Nobody takes this honor on himself, but he is called by God, just like Aaron was.
So also Christ didn't glorify himself to be made a high priest, but it was he who said to him, 'You are my Son. Today I have become your father.'
As he says also in another place, 'You are a priest forever, after the order of Melchizedek.'
He, in the days of his flesh, having offered up prayers and petitions with strong crying and tears to him who was able to save him from death, and having been heard for his godly fear,
though he was a Son, yet learned obedience by the things which he suffered.
Having been made perfect, he became to all of those who obey him the author of eternal salvation,
named by God a high priest after the order of Melchizedek.
About him we have many words to say, and hard to interpret, seeing you have become dull of hearing.
For when by reason of the time you ought to be teachers, you again need to have someone teach you the rudiments of the first principles of the oracles of God. You have come to need milk, and not solid food.
For everyone who lives on milk is not experienced in the word of righteousness, for he is a baby.
But solid food is for those who are full grown, who by reason of use have their senses exercised to discern good and evil.
Therefore, when we couldn't stand it any longer, we thought it good to be left behind at Athens alone,
and sent Timothy, our brother and God's servant in the Good News of Christ, to establish you, and to comfort you concerning your faith;
that no one be moved by these afflictions. For you know that we are appointed to this task.
For most certainly, when we were with you, we told you beforehand that we are to suffer affliction, even as it happened, and you know.
For this cause I also, when I couldn't stand it any longer, sent that I might know your faith, for fear that by any means the tempter had tempted you, and our labor would have been in vain.
But when Timothy came just now to us from you, and brought us glad news of your faith and love, and that you have good memories of us always, longing to see us, even as we also long to see you;
for this cause, brothers, we were comforted over you in all our distress and affliction through your faith.
For now we live, if you stand fast in the Lord.
For what thanksgiving can we render again to God for you, for all the joy with which we rejoice for your sakes before our God;
night and day praying exceedingly that we may see your face, and may perfect that which is lacking in your faith?
Now may our God and Father himself, and our Lord Jesus Christ, direct our way to you;
and the Lord make you to increase and abound in love one toward another, and toward all men, even as we also do toward you,
to the end he may establish your hearts blameless in holiness before our God and Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus with all his saints.
Jesus said these things, and lifting up his eyes to heaven, he said, 'Father, the time has come. Glorify your Son, that your Son may also glorify you;
even as you gave him authority over all flesh, he will give eternal life to all whom you have given him.
This is eternal life, that they should know you, the only true God, and him whom you sent, Jesus Christ.
I glorified you on the earth. I have accomplished the work which you have given me to do.
Now, Father, glorify me with your own self with the glory which I had with you before the world existed.
I revealed your name to the people whom you have given me out of the world. They were yours, and you have given them to me. They have kept your word.
Now they have known that all things whatever you have given me are from you,
for the words which you have given me I have given to them, and they received them, and knew for sure that I came forth from you, and they have believed that you sent me.
I pray for them. I don't pray for the world, but for those whom you have given me, for they are yours.
All things that are mine are yours, and yours are mine, and I am glorified in them.
I am no more in the world, but these are in the world, and I am coming to you. Holy Father, keep them through your name which you have given me, that they may be one, even as we are.
While I was with them in the world, I kept them in your name. Those whom you have given me I have kept. None of them is lost, except the son of destruction, that the Scripture might be fulfilled.
But now I come to you, and I say these things in the world, that they may have my joy made full in themselves.
I have given them your word. The world hated them, because they are not of the world, even as I am not of the world.
I pray not that you would take them from the world, but that you would keep them from the evil one.
They are not of the world even as I am not of the world.
Sanctify them in your truth. Your word is truth.
As you sent me into the world, even so I have sent them into the world.
For their sakes I sanctify myself, that they themselves also may be sanctified in truth.
Not for these only do I pray, but for those also who believe in me through their word,
that they may all be one; even as you, Father, are in me, and I in you, that they also may be one in us; that the world may believe that you sent me.
The glory which you have given me, I have given to them; that they may be one, even as we are one;
I in them, and you in me, that they may be perfected into one; that the world may know that you sent me, and loved them, even as you loved me.
Father, I desire that they also whom you have given me be with me where I am, that they may see my glory, which you have given me, for you loved me before the foundation of the world.
Righteous Father, the world hasn't known you, but I knew you; and these knew that you sent me.
I made known to them your name, and will make it known; that the love with which you loved me may be in them, and I in them.'
Finally, brothers, pray for us, that the word of the Lord may spread rapidly and be glorified, even as also with you;
and that we may be delivered from unreasonable and evil men; for not all have faith.
But the Lord is faithful, who will establish you, and guard you from the evil one.
We have confidence in the Lord concerning you, that you both do and will do the things we command.
May the Lord direct your hearts into the love of God, and into the patience of Christ.
Now we command you, brothers, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you withdraw yourselves from every brother who walks in rebellion, and not after the tradition which they received from us.
For you know how you ought to imitate us. For we didn't behave ourselves rebelliously among you,
neither did we eat bread from anyone's hand without paying for it, but in labor and travail worked night and day, that we might not burden any of you;
not because we don't have the right, but to make ourselves an example to you, that you should imitate us.
For even when we were with you, we commanded you this: 'If anyone will not work, neither let him eat.'
For we hear of some who walk among you in rebellion, who don't work at all, but are busybodies.
Now those who are that way, we command and exhort in the Lord Jesus Christ, that with quietness they work, and eat their own bread.
But you, brothers, don't be weary in doing well.
If any man doesn't obey our word in this letter, note that man, that you have no company with him, to the end that he may be ashamed.
Don't count him as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother.
Now may the Lord of peace himself give you peace at all times in all ways. The Lord be with you all.
The greeting of me, Paul, with my own hand, which is the sign in every letter: this is how I write.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.
Meanwhile, when a multitude of many thousands had gathered together, so much so that they trampled on each other, he began to tell his disciples first of all, 'Beware of the yeast of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy.
But there is nothing covered up, that will not be revealed, nor hidden, that will not be known.
Therefore whatever you have said in the darkness will be heard in the light. What you have spoken in the ear in the inner chambers will be proclaimed on the housetops.
'I tell you, my friends, don't be afraid of those who kill the body, and after that have no more that they can do.
But I will warn you whom you should fear. Fear him, who after he has killed, has power to cast into Gehenna. Yes, I tell you, fear him.
'Aren't five sparrows sold for two assaria coins? Not one of them is forgotten by God.
But the very hairs of your head are all numbered. Therefore don't be afraid. You are of more value than many sparrows.
'I tell you, everyone who confesses me before men, him will the Son of Man also confess before the angels of God;
but he who denies me in the presence of men will be denied in the presence of the angels of God.
Everyone who speaks a word against the Son of Man will be forgiven, but those who blaspheme against the Holy Spirit will not be forgiven.
When they bring you before the synagogues, the rulers, and the authorities, don't be anxious how or what you will answer, or what you will say;
for the Holy Spirit will teach you in that same hour what you must say.'
One of the multitude said to him, 'Teacher, tell my brother to divide the inheritance with me.'
But he said to him, 'Man, who made me a judge or an arbitrator over you?'
He said to them, 'Beware! Keep yourselves from covetousness, for a man's life doesn't consist of the abundance of the things which he possesses.'
He spoke a parable to them, saying, 'The ground of a certain rich man brought forth abundantly.
He reasoned within himself, saying, 'What will I do, because I don't have room to store my crops?'
He said, 'This is what I will do. I will pull down my barns, and build bigger ones, and there I will store all my grain and my goods.
I will tell my soul, 'Soul, you have many goods laid up for many years. Take your ease, eat, drink, be merry.''
'But God said to him, 'You foolish one, tonight your soul is required of you. The things which you have prepared--whose will they be?'
So is he who lays up treasure for himself, and is not rich toward God.'
He said to his disciples, 'Therefore I tell you, don't be anxious for your life, what you will eat, nor yet for your body, what you will wear.
Life is more than food, and the body is more than clothing.
Consider the ravens: they don't sow, they don't reap, they have no warehouse or barn, and God feeds them. How much more valuable are you than birds!
Which of you by being anxious can add a cubit to his height?
If then you aren't able to do even the least things, why are you anxious about the rest?
Consider the lilies, how they grow. They don't toil, neither do they spin; yet I tell you, even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these.
But if this is how God clothes the grass in the field, which today exists, and tomorrow is cast into the oven, how much more will he clothe you, O you of little faith?
Don't seek what you will eat or what you will drink; neither be anxious.
For the nations of the world seek after all of these things, but your Father knows that you need these things.
But seek God's Kingdom, and all these things will be added to you.
Don't be afraid, little flock, for it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the Kingdom.
Sell that which you have, and give gifts to the needy. Make for yourselves purses which don't grow old, a treasure in the heavens that doesn't fail, where no thief approaches, neither moth destroys.
For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.
'Let your waist be girded and your lamps burning.
Be like men watching for their lord, when he returns from the marriage feast; that, when he comes and knocks, they may immediately open to him.
Blessed are those servants, whom the lord will find watching when he comes. Most certainly I tell you, that he will dress himself, and make them recline, and will come and serve them.
They will be blessed if he comes in the second or third watch, and finds them so.
But know this, that if the master of the house had known in what hour the thief was coming, he would have watched, and not allowed his house to be broken into.
Therefore be ready also, for the Son of Man is coming in an hour that you don't expect him.'
Peter said to him, 'Lord, are you telling this parable to us, or to everybody?'
The Lord said, 'Who then is the faithful and wise steward, whom his lord will set over his household, to give them their portion of food at the right times?
Blessed is that servant whom his lord will find doing so when he comes.
Truly I tell you, that he will set him over all that he has.
But if that servant says in his heart, 'My lord delays his coming,' and begins to beat the menservants and the maidservants, and to eat and drink, and to be drunken,
then the lord of that servant will come in a day when he isn't expecting him, and in an hour that he doesn't know, and will cut him in two, and place his portion with the unfaithful.
That servant, who knew his lord's will, and didn't prepare, nor do what he wanted, will be beaten with many stripes,
but he who didn't know, and did things worthy of stripes, will be beaten with few stripes. To whoever much is given, of him will much be required; and to whom much was entrusted, of him more will be asked.
'I came to throw fire on the earth. I wish it were already kindled.
But I have a baptism to be baptized with, and how distressed I am until it is accomplished!
Do you think that I have come to give peace in the earth? I tell you, no, but rather division.
For from now on, there will be five in one house divided, three against two, and two against three.
They will be divided, father against son, and son against father; mother against daughter, and daughter against her mother; mother-in-law against her daughter-in-law, and daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law.'
He said to the multitudes also, 'When you see a cloud rising from the west, immediately you say, 'A shower is coming,' and so it happens.
When a south wind blows, you say, 'There will be a scorching heat,' and it happens.
You hypocrites! You know how to interpret the appearance of the earth and the sky, but how is it that you don't interpret this time?
Why don't you judge for yourselves what is right?
For when you are going with your adversary before the magistrate, try diligently on the way to be released from him, lest perhaps he drag you to the judge, and the judge deliver you to the officer, and the officer throw you into prison.
I tell you, you will by no means get out of there, until you have paid the very last penny.'
Jesus, full of the Holy Spirit, returned from the Jordan, and was led by the Spirit into the wilderness
for forty days, being tempted by the devil. He ate nothing in those days. Afterward, when they were completed, he was hungry.
The devil said to him, 'If you are the Son of God, command this stone to become bread.'
Jesus answered him, saying, 'It is written, 'Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word of God.''
The devil, leading him up on a high mountain, showed him all the kingdoms of the world in a moment of time.
The devil said to him, 'I will give you all this authority, and their glory, for it has been delivered to me; and I give it to whomever I want.
If you therefore will worship before me, it will all be yours.'
Jesus answered him, 'Get behind me Satan! For it is written, 'You shall worship the Lord your God, and you shall serve him only.''
He led him to Jerusalem, and set him on the pinnacle of the temple, and said to him, 'If you are the Son of God, cast yourself down from here,
for it is written, 'He will put his angels in charge of you, to guard you;'
and, 'On their hands they will bear you up, lest perhaps you dash your foot against a stone.''
Jesus answering, said to him, 'It has been said, 'You shall not tempt the Lord your God.''
When the devil had completed every temptation, he departed from him until another time.
Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit into Galilee, and news about him spread through all the surrounding area.
He taught in their synagogues, being glorified by all.
He came to Nazareth, where he had been brought up. He entered, as was his custom, into the synagogue on the Sabbath day, and stood up to read.
The book of the prophet Isaiah was handed to him. He opened the book, and found the place where it was written,
'The Spirit of the Lord is on me, because he has anointed me to preach good news to the poor. He has sent me to heal the brokenhearted, to proclaim release to the captives, recovering of sight to the blind, to deliver those who are crushed,
and to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord.'
He closed the book, gave it back to the attendant, and sat down. The eyes of all in the synagogue were fastened on him.
He began to tell them, 'Today, this Scripture has been fulfilled in your hearing.'
All testified about him, and wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth, and they said, 'Isn't this Joseph's son?'
He said to them, 'Doubtless you will tell me this parable, 'Physician, heal yourself! Whatever we have heard done at Capernaum, do also here in your hometown.''
He said, 'Most certainly I tell you, no prophet is acceptable in his hometown.
But truly I tell you, there were many widows in Israel in the days of Elijah, when the sky was shut up three years and six months, when a great famine came over all the land.
Elijah was sent to none of them, except to Zarephath, in the land of Sidon, to a woman who was a widow.
There were many lepers in Israel in the time of Elisha the prophet, yet not one of them was cleansed, except Naaman, the Syrian.'
They were all filled with wrath in the synagogue, as they heard these things.
They rose up, threw him out of the city, and led him to the brow of the hill that their city was built on, that they might throw him off the cliff.
But he, passing through the midst of them, went his way.
He came down to Capernaum, a city of Galilee. He was teaching them on the Sabbath day,
and they were astonished at his teaching, for his word was with authority.
In the synagogue there was a man who had a spirit of an unclean demon, and he cried out with a loud voice,
saying, 'Ah! what have we to do with you, Jesus of Nazareth? Have you come to destroy us? I know you who you are: the Holy One of God!'
Jesus rebuked him, saying, 'Be silent, and come out of him!' When the demon had thrown him down in their midst, he came out of him, having done him no harm.
Amazement came on all, and they spoke together, one with another, saying, 'What is this word? For with authority and power he commands the unclean spirits, and they come out!'
News about him went out into every place of the surrounding region.
He rose up from the synagogue, and entered into Simon's house. Simon's mother-in-law was afflicted with a great fever, and they begged him for her.
He stood over her, and rebuked the fever; and it left her. Immediately she rose up and served them.
When the sun was setting, all those who had any sick with various diseases brought them to him; and he laid his hands on every one of them, and healed them.
Demons also came out from many, crying out, and saying, 'You are the Christ, the Son of God!' Rebuking them, he didn't allow them to speak, because they knew that he was the Christ.
When it was day, he departed and went into an uninhabited place, and the multitudes looked for him, and came to him, and held on to him, so that he wouldn't go away from them.
But he said to them, 'I must preach the good news of the Kingdom of God to the other cities also. For this reason I have been sent.'
He was preaching in the synagogues of Galilee.
In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.
The same was in the beginning with God.
All things were made through him. Without him was not anything made that has been made.
In him was life, and the life was the light of men.
The light shines in the darkness, and the darkness hasn't overcome it.
There came a man, sent from God, whose name was John.
The same came as a witness, that he might testify about the light, that all might believe through him.
He was not the light, but was sent that he might testify about the light.
The true light that enlightens everyone was coming into the world.
He was in the world, and the world was made through him, and the world didn't recognize him.
He came to his own, and those who were his own didn't receive him.
But as many as received him, to them he gave the right to become God's children, to those who believe in his name:
who were born not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.
The Word became flesh, and lived among us. We saw his glory, such glory as of the one and only Son of the Father, full of grace and truth.
John testified about him. He cried out, saying, 'This was he of whom I said, 'He who comes after me has surpassed me, for he was before me.''
From his fullness we all received grace upon grace.
For the law was given through Moses. Grace and truth came through Jesus Christ.
No one has seen God at any time. The one and only Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him.
This is John's testimony, when the Jews sent priests and Levites from Jerusalem to ask him, 'Who are you?'
He confessed, and didn't deny, but he confessed, 'I am not the Christ.'
They asked him, 'What then? Are you Elijah?' He said, 'I am not.' 'Are you the prophet?' He answered, 'No.'
They said therefore to him, 'Who are you? Give us an answer to take back to those who sent us. What do you say about yourself?'
He said, 'I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness, 'Make straight the way of the Lord,' as Isaiah the prophet said.'
The ones who had been sent were from the Pharisees.
They asked him, 'Why then do you baptize, if you are not the Christ, nor Elijah, nor the prophet?'
John answered them, 'I baptize in water, but among you stands one whom you don't know.
He is the one who comes after me, who is preferred before me, whose sandal strap I'm not worthy to loosen.'
These things were done in Bethany beyond the Jordan, where John was baptizing.
The next day, he saw Jesus coming to him, and said, 'Behold, the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world!
This is he of whom I said, 'After me comes a man who is preferred before me, for he was before me.'
I didn't know him, but for this reason I came baptizing in water: that he would be revealed to Israel.'
John testified, saying, 'I have seen the Spirit descending like a dove out of heaven, and it remained on him.
I didn't recognize him, but he who sent me to baptize in water, he said to me, 'On whomever you will see the Spirit descending, and remaining on him, the same is he who baptizes in the Holy Spirit.'
I have seen, and have testified that this is the Son of God.'
Again, the next day, John was standing with two of his disciples,
and he looked at Jesus as he walked, and said, 'Behold, the Lamb of God!'
The two disciples heard him speak, and they followed Jesus.
Jesus turned, and saw them following, and said to them, 'What are you looking for?' They said to him, 'Rabbi' (which is to say, being interpreted, Teacher), 'where are you staying?'
He said to them, 'Come, and see.' They came and saw where he was staying, and they stayed with him that day. It was about the tenth hour.
One of the two who heard John, and followed him, was Andrew, Simon Peter's brother.
He first found his own brother, Simon, and said to him, 'We have found the Messiah!' (which is, being interpreted, Christ).
He brought him to Jesus. Jesus looked at him, and said, 'You are Simon the son of Jonah. You shall be called Cephas' (which is by interpretation, Peter).
On the next day, he was determined to go out into Galilee, and he found Philip. Jesus said to him, 'Follow me.'
Now Philip was from Bethsaida, of the city of Andrew and Peter.
Philip found Nathanael, and said to him, 'We have found him, of whom Moses in the law, and the prophets, wrote: Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph.'
Nathanael said to him, 'Can any good thing come out of Nazareth?' Philip said to him, 'Come and see.'
Jesus saw Nathanael coming to him, and said about him, 'Behold, an Israelite indeed, in whom is no deceit!'
Nathanael said to him, 'How do you know me?' Jesus answered him, 'Before Philip called you, when you were under the fig tree, I saw you.'
Nathanael answered him, 'Rabbi, you are the Son of God! You are King of Israel!'
Jesus answered him, 'Because I told you, 'I saw you underneath the fig tree,' do you believe? You will see greater things than these!'
He said to him, 'Most certainly, I tell you, hereafter you will see heaven opened, and the angels of God ascending and descending on the Son of Man.'
He entered into a boat, and crossed over, and came into his own city.
Behold, they brought to him a man who was paralyzed, lying on a bed. Jesus, seeing their faith, said to the paralytic, 'Son, cheer up! Your sins are forgiven you.'
Behold, some of the scribes said to themselves, 'This man blasphemes.'
Jesus, knowing their thoughts, said, 'Why do you think evil in your hearts?
For which is easier, to say, 'Your sins are forgiven;' or to say, 'Get up, and walk?'
But that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins...' (then he said to the paralytic), 'Get up, and take up your mat, and go up to your house.'
He arose and departed to his house.
But when the multitudes saw it, they marveled and glorified God, who had given such authority to men.
As Jesus passed by from there, he saw a man called Matthew sitting at the tax collection office. He said to him, 'Follow me.' He got up and followed him.
It happened as he sat in the house, behold, many tax collectors and sinners came and sat down with Jesus and his disciples.
When the Pharisees saw it, they said to his disciples, 'Why does your teacher eat with tax collectors and sinners?'
When Jesus heard it, he said to them, 'Those who are healthy have no need for a physician, but those who are sick do.
But you go and learn what this means: 'I desire mercy, and not sacrifice,''
Then John's disciples came to him, saying, 'Why do we and the Pharisees fast often, but your disciples don't fast?'
Jesus said to them, 'Can the friends of the bridegroom mourn, as long as the bridegroom is with them? But the days will come when the bridegroom will be taken away from them, and then they will fast.
No one puts a piece of unshrunk cloth on an old garment; for the patch would tear away from the garment, and a worse hole is made.
Neither do people put new wine into old wineskins, or else the skins would burst, and the wine be spilled, and the skins ruined. No, they put new wine into fresh wineskins, and both are preserved.'
While he told these things to them, behold, a ruler came and worshiped him, saying, 'My daughter has just died, but come and lay your hand on her, and she will live.'
Jesus got up and followed him, as did his disciples.
Behold, a woman who had an issue of blood for twelve years came behind him, and touched the fringe of his garment;
for she said within herself, 'If I just touch his garment, I will be made well.'
But Jesus, turning around and seeing her, said, 'Daughter, cheer up! Your faith has made you well.' And the woman was made well from that hour.
When Jesus came into the ruler's house, and saw the flute players, and the crowd in noisy disorder,
he said to them, 'Make room, because the girl isn't dead, but sleeping.' They were ridiculing him.
But when the crowd was put out, he entered in, took her by the hand, and the girl arose.
The report of this went out into all that land.
As Jesus passed by from there, two blind men followed him, calling out and saying, 'Have mercy on us, son of David!'
When he had come into the house, the blind men came to him. Jesus said to them, 'Do you believe that I am able to do this?' They told him, 'Yes, Lord.'
Then he touched their eyes, saying, 'According to your faith be it done to you.'
Their eyes were opened. Jesus strictly commanded them, saying, 'See that no one knows about this.'
But they went out and spread abroad his fame in all that land.
As they went out, behold, a mute man who was demon possessed was brought to him.
When the demon was cast out, the mute man spoke. The multitudes marveled, saying, 'Nothing like this has ever been seen in Israel!'
But the Pharisees said, 'By the prince of the demons, he casts out demons.'
Jesus went about all the cities and the villages, teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the Good News of the Kingdom, and healing every disease and every sickness among the people.
But when he saw the multitudes, he was moved with compassion for them, because they were harassed and scattered, like sheep without a shepherd.
Then he said to his disciples, 'The harvest indeed is plentiful, but the laborers are few.
Pray therefore that the Lord of the harvest will send out laborers into his harvest.'
This is a faithful saying: if a man seeks the office of an overseer, he desires a good work.
The overseer therefore must be without reproach, the husband of one wife, temperate, sensible, modest, hospitable, good at teaching;
not a drinker, not violent, not greedy for money, but gentle, not quarrelsome, not covetous;
one who rules his own house well, having children in subjection with all reverence;
(but if a man doesn't know how to rule his own house, how will he take care of the assembly of God?)
not a new convert, lest being puffed up he fall into the same condemnation as the devil.
Moreover he must have good testimony from those who are outside, to avoid falling into reproach and the snare of the devil.
Servants, in the same way, must be reverent, not double-tongued, not addicted to much wine, not greedy for money;
holding the mystery of the faith in a pure conscience.
Let them also first be tested; then let them serve if they are blameless.
Their wives in the same way must be reverent, not slanderers, temperate, faithful in all things.
Let servants be husbands of one wife, ruling their children and their own houses well.
For those who have served well gain for themselves a good standing, and great boldness in the faith which is in Christ Jesus.
These things I write to you, hoping to come to you shortly;
but if I wait long, that you may know how men ought to behave themselves in the house of God, which is the assembly of the living God, the pillar and ground of the truth.
Without controversy, the mystery of godliness is great: God was revealed in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen by angels, preached among the nations, believed on in the world, and received up in glory.
Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ, to the chosen ones who are living as foreigners in the Dispersion in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia,
according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, in sanctification of the Spirit, that you may obey Jesus Christ and be sprinkled with his blood: Grace to you and peace be multiplied.
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who according to his great mercy became our father again to a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead,
to an incorruptible and undefiled inheritance that doesn't fade away, reserved in Heaven for you,
who by the power of God are guarded through faith for a salvation ready to be revealed in the last time.
Wherein you greatly rejoice, though now for a little while, if need be, you have been put to grief in various trials,
that the proof of your faith, which is more precious than gold that perishes even though it is tested by fire, may be found to result in praise, glory, and honor at the revelation of Jesus Christ--
whom not having known you love; in whom, though now you don't see him, yet believing, you rejoice greatly with joy unspeakable and full of glory--
receiving the result of your faith, the salvation of your souls.
Concerning this salvation, the prophets sought and searched diligently, who prophesied of the grace that would come to you,
searching for who or what kind of time the Spirit of Christ, which was in them, pointed to, when he predicted the sufferings of Christ, and the glories that would follow them.
To them it was revealed, that not to themselves, but to you, they ministered these things, which now have been announced to you through those who preached the Good News to you by the Holy Spirit sent out from heaven; which things angels desire to look into.
Therefore, prepare your minds for action, be sober and set your hope fully on the grace that will be brought to you at the revelation of Jesus Christ--
as children of obedience, not conforming yourselves according to your former lusts as in your ignorance,
but just as he who called you is holy, you yourselves also be holy in all of your behavior;
because it is written, 'You shall be holy; for I am holy.'
If you call on him as Father, who without respect of persons judges according to each man's work, pass the time of your living as foreigners here in reverent fear:
knowing that you were redeemed, not with corruptible things, with silver or gold, from the useless way of life handed down from your fathers,
but with precious blood, as of a faultless and pure lamb, the blood of Christ;
who was foreknown indeed before the foundation of the world, but was revealed at the end of times for your sake,
who through him are believers in God, who raised him from the dead, and gave him glory; so that your faith and hope might be in God.
Seeing you have purified your souls in your obedience to the truth through the Spirit in sincere brotherly affection, love one another from the heart fervently:
having been born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, through the word of God, which lives and remains forever.
For, 'All flesh is like grass, and all of man's glory like the flower in the grass. The grass withers, and its flower falls;
but the Lord's word endures forever.' This is the word of Good News which was preached to you.
Then after a period of fourteen years I went up again to Jerusalem with Barnabas, taking Titus also with me.
I went up by revelation, and I laid before them the Good News which I preach among the Gentiles, but privately before those who were respected, for fear that I might be running, or had run, in vain.
But not even Titus, who was with me, being a Greek, was compelled to be circumcised.
This was because of the false brothers secretly brought in, who stole in to spy out our liberty which we have in Christ Jesus, that they might bring us into bondage;
to whom we gave no place in the way of subjection, not for an hour, that the truth of the Good News might continue with you.
But from those who were reputed to be important (whatever they were, it makes no difference to me; God doesn't show partiality to man)--they, I say, who were respected imparted nothing to me,
but to the contrary, when they saw that I had been entrusted with the Good News for the uncircumcision, even as Peter with the Good News for the circumcision
(for he who appointed Peter to the apostleship of the circumcision appointed me also to the Gentiles);
and when they perceived the grace that was given to me, James and Cephas and John, they who were reputed to be pillars, gave to me and Barnabas the right hand of fellowship, that we should go to the Gentiles, and they to the circumcision.
They only asked us to remember the poor--which very thing I was also zealous to do.
But when Peter came to Antioch, I resisted him to his face, because he stood condemned.
For before some people came from James, he ate with the Gentiles. But when they came, he drew back and separated himself, fearing those who were of the circumcision.
And the rest of the Jews joined him in his hypocrisy; so that even Barnabas was carried away with their hypocrisy.
But when I saw that they didn't walk uprightly according to the truth of the Good News, I said to Peter before them all, 'If you, being a Jew, live as the Gentiles do, and not as the Jews do, why do you compel the Gentiles to live as the Jews do?
'We, being Jews by nature, and not Gentile sinners,
yet knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the law but through faith in Jesus Christ, even we believed in Christ Jesus, that we might be justified by faith in Christ, and not by the works of the law, because no flesh will be justified by the works of the law.
But if, while we sought to be justified in Christ, we ourselves also were found sinners, is Christ a servant of sin? Certainly not!
For if I build up again those things which I destroyed, I prove myself a law-breaker.
For I, through the law, died to the law, that I might live to God.
I have been crucified with Christ, and it is no longer I that live, but Christ living in me. That life which I now live in the flesh, I live by faith in the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself up for me.
I don't make void the grace of God. For if righteousness is through the law, then Christ died for nothing!'
Let brotherly love continue.
Don't forget to show hospitality to strangers, for in doing so, some have entertained angels without knowing it.
Remember those who are in bonds, as bound with them; and those who are ill-treated, since you are also in the body.
Let marriage be held in honor among all, and let the bed be undefiled: but God will judge the sexually immoral and adulterers.
Be free from the love of money, content with such things as you have, for he has said, 'I will in no way leave you, neither will I in any way forsake you.'
So that with good courage we say, 'The Lord is my helper. I will not fear. What can man do to me?'
Remember your leaders, men who spoke to you the word of God, and considering the results of their conduct, imitate their faith.
Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, today, and forever.
Don't be carried away by various and strange teachings, for it is good that the heart be established by grace, not by food, through which those who were so occupied were not benefited.
We have an altar from which those who serve the holy tabernacle have no right to eat.
For the bodies of those animals, whose blood is brought into the holy place by the high priest as an offering for sin, are burned outside of the camp.
Therefore Jesus also, that he might sanctify the people through his own blood, suffered outside of the gate.
Let us therefore go out to him outside of the camp, bearing his reproach.
For we don't have here an enduring city, but we seek that which is to come.
Through him, then, let us offer up a sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is, the fruit of lips which proclaim allegiance to his name.
But don't forget to be doing good and sharing, for with such sacrifices God is well pleased.
Obey your leaders and submit to them, for they watch on behalf of your souls, as those who will give account, that they may do this with joy, and not with groaning, for that would be unprofitable for you.
Pray for us, for we are persuaded that we have a good conscience, desiring to live honorably in all things.
I strongly urge you to do this, that I may be restored to you sooner.
Now may the God of peace, who brought again from the dead the great shepherd of the sheep with the blood of an eternal covenant, our Lord Jesus,
make you complete in every good work to do his will, working in you that which is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be the glory forever and ever. Amen.
But I exhort you, brothers, endure the word of exhortation, for I have written to you in few words.
Know that our brother Timothy has been freed, with whom, if he comes shortly, I will see you.
Greet all of your leaders and all the saints. The Italians greet you.
Grace be with you all. Amen.
But on the first day of the week, at early dawn, they and some others came to the tomb, bringing the spices which they had prepared.
They found the stone rolled away from the tomb.
They entered in, and didn't find the Lord Jesus' body.
It happened, while they were greatly perplexed about this, behold, two men stood by them in dazzling clothing.
Becoming terrified, they bowed their faces down to the earth. They said to them, 'Why do you seek the living among the dead?
He isn't here, but is risen. Remember what he told you when he was still in Galilee,
saying that the Son of Man must be delivered up into the hands of sinful men, and be crucified, and the third day rise again?'
They remembered his words,
returned from the tomb, and told all these things to the eleven, and to all the rest.
Now they were Mary Magdalene, Joanna, and Mary the mother of James. The other women with them told these things to the apostles.
These words seemed to them to be nonsense, and they didn't believe them.
But Peter got up and ran to the tomb. Stooping and looking in, he saw the strips of linen lying by themselves, and he departed to his home, wondering what had happened.
Behold, two of them were going that very day to a village named Emmaus, which was sixty stadia from Jerusalem.
They talked with each other about all of these things which had happened.
It happened, while they talked and questioned together, that Jesus himself came near, and went with them.
But their eyes were kept from recognizing him.
He said to them, 'What are you talking about as you walk, and are sad?'
One of them, named Cleopas, answered him, 'Are you the only stranger in Jerusalem who doesn't know the things which have happened there in these days?'
He said to them, 'What things?' They said to him, 'The things concerning Jesus, the Nazarene, who was a prophet mighty in deed and word before God and all the people;
and how the chief priests and our rulers delivered him up to be condemned to death, and crucified him.
But we were hoping that it was he who would redeem Israel. Yes, and besides all this, it is now the third day since these things happened.
Also, certain women of our company amazed us, having arrived early at the tomb;
and when they didn't find his body, they came saying that they had also seen a vision of angels, who said that he was alive.
Some of us went to the tomb, and found it just like the women had said, but they didn't see him.'
He said to them, 'Foolish men, and slow of heart to believe in all that the prophets have spoken!
Didn't the Christ have to suffer these things and to enter into his glory?'
Beginning from Moses and from all the prophets, he explained to them in all the Scriptures the things concerning himself.
They drew near to the village, where they were going, and he acted like he would go further.
They urged him, saying, 'Stay with us, for it is almost evening, and the day is almost over.' He went in to stay with them.
It happened, that when he had sat down at the table with them, he took the bread and gave thanks. Breaking it, he gave to them.
Their eyes were opened, and they recognized him, and he vanished out of their sight.
They said one to another, 'Weren't our hearts burning within us, while he spoke to us along the way, and while he opened the Scriptures to us?'
They rose up that very hour, returned to Jerusalem, and found the eleven gathered together, and those who were with them,
saying, 'The Lord is risen indeed, and has appeared to Simon!'
They related the things that happened along the way, and how he was recognized by them in the breaking of the bread.
As they said these things, Jesus himself stood among them, and said to them, 'Peace be to you.'
But they were terrified and filled with fear, and supposed that they had seen a spirit.
He said to them, 'Why are you troubled? Why do doubts arise in your hearts?
See my hands and my feet, that it is truly me. Touch me and see, for a spirit doesn't have flesh and bones, as you see that I have.'
When he had said this, he showed them his hands and his feet.
While they still didn't believe for joy, and wondered, he said to them, 'Do you have anything here to eat?'
They gave him a piece of a broiled fish and some honeycomb.
He took them, and ate in front of them.
He said to them, 'This is what I told you, while I was still with you, that all things which are written in the law of Moses, the prophets, and the psalms, concerning me must be fulfilled.'
Then he opened their minds, that they might understand the Scriptures.
He said to them, 'Thus it is written, and thus it was necessary for the Christ to suffer and to rise from the dead the third day,
and that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name to all the nations, beginning at Jerusalem.
You are witnesses of these things.
Behold, I send forth the promise of my Father on you. But wait in the city of Jerusalem until you are clothed with power from on high.'
He led them out as far as Bethany, and he lifted up his hands, and blessed them.
It happened, while he blessed them, that he withdrew from them, and was carried up into heaven.
They worshiped him, and returned to Jerusalem with great joy,
and were continually in the temple, praising and blessing God. Amen.
After these things, Jesus revealed himself again to the disciples at the sea of Tiberias. He revealed himself this way.
Simon Peter, Thomas called Didymus, Nathanael of Cana in Galilee, and the sons of Zebedee, and two others of his disciples were together.
Simon Peter said to them, 'I'm going fishing.' They told him, 'We are also coming with you.' They immediately went out, and entered into the boat. That night, they caught nothing.
But when day had already come, Jesus stood on the beach, yet the disciples didn't know that it was Jesus.
Jesus therefore said to them, 'Children, have you anything to eat?' They answered him, 'No.'
He said to them, 'Cast the net on the right side of the boat, and you will find some.' They cast it therefore, and now they weren't able to draw it in for the multitude of fish.
That disciple therefore whom Jesus loved said to Peter, 'It's the Lord!' So when Simon Peter heard that it was the Lord, he wrapped his coat around him (for he was naked), and threw himself into the sea.
But the other disciples came in the little boat (for they were not far from the land, but about two hundred cubits away), dragging the net full of fish.
So when they got out on the land, they saw a fire of coals there, and fish laid on it, and bread.
Jesus said to them, 'Bring some of the fish which you have just caught.'
Simon Peter went up, and drew the net to land, full of great fish, one hundred fifty-three; and even though there were so many, the net wasn't torn.
Jesus said to them, 'Come and eat breakfast.' None of the disciples dared inquire of him, 'Who are you?' knowing that it was the Lord.
Then Jesus came and took the bread, gave it to them, and the fish likewise.
This is now the third time that Jesus was revealed to his disciples, after he had risen from the dead.
So when they had eaten their breakfast, Jesus said to Simon Peter, 'Simon, son of Jonah, do you love me more than these?' He said to him, 'Yes, Lord; you know that I have affection for you.' He said to him, 'Feed my lambs.'
He said to him again a second time, 'Simon, son of Jonah, do you love me?' He said to him, 'Yes, Lord; you know that I have affection for you.' He said to him, 'Tend my sheep.'
He said to him the third time, 'Simon, son of Jonah, do you have affection for me?' Peter was grieved because he asked him the third time, 'Do you have affection for me?' He said to him, 'Lord, you know everything. You know that I have affection for you.' Jesus said to him, 'Feed my sheep.
Most certainly I tell you, when you were young, you dressed yourself, and walked where you wanted to. But when you are old, you will stretch out your hands, and another will dress you, and carry you where you don't want to go.'
Now he said this, signifying by what kind of death he would glorify God. When he had said this, he said to him, 'Follow me.'
Then Peter, turning around, saw a disciple following. This was the disciple whom Jesus sincerely loved, the one who had also leaned on Jesus' breast at the supper and asked, 'Lord, who is going to betray You?'
Peter seeing him, said to Jesus, 'Lord, what about this man?'
Jesus said to him, 'If I desire that he stay until I come, what is that to you? You follow me.'
This saying therefore went out among the brothers, that this disciple wouldn't die. Yet Jesus didn't say to him that he wouldn't die, but, 'If I desire that he stay until I come, what is that to you?'
This is the disciple who testifies about these things, and wrote these things. We know that his witness is true.
There are also many other things which Jesus did, which if they would all be written, I suppose that even the world itself wouldn't have room for the books that would be written.
I therefore, the prisoner in the Lord, beg you to walk worthily of the calling with which you were called,
with all lowliness and humility, with patience, bearing with one another in love;
being eager to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.
There is one body, and one Spirit, even as you also were called in one hope of your calling;
one Lord, one faith, one baptism,
one God and Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in us all.
But to each one of us was the grace given according to the measure of the gift of Christ.
Therefore he says, 'When he ascended on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts to men.'
Now this, 'He ascended,' what is it but that he also first descended into the lower parts of the earth?
He who descended is the one who also ascended far above all the heavens, that he might fill all things.
He gave some to be apostles; and some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and some, shepherds and teachers;
for the perfecting of the saints, to the work of serving, to the building up of the body of Christ;
until we all attain to the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, to a full grown man, to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ;
that we may no longer be children, tossed back and forth and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the trickery of men, in craftiness, after the wiles of error;
but speaking truth in love, we may grow up in all things into him, who is the head, Christ;
from whom all the body, being fitted and knit together through that which every joint supplies, according to the working in measure of each individual part, makes the body increase to the building up of itself in love.
This I say therefore, and testify in the Lord, that you no longer walk as the rest of the Gentiles also walk, in the futility of their mind,
being darkened in their understanding, alienated from the life of God, because of the ignorance that is in them, because of the hardening of their hearts;
who having become callous gave themselves up to lust, to work all uncleanness with greediness.
But you did not learn Christ that way;
if indeed you heard him, and were taught in him, even as truth is in Jesus:
that you put away, as concerning your former way of life, the old man, that grows corrupt after the lusts of deceit;
and that you be renewed in the spirit of your mind,
and put on the new man, who in the likeness of God has been created in righteousness and holiness of truth.
Therefore, putting away falsehood, speak truth each one with his neighbor. For we are members of one another.
'Be angry, and don't sin.' Don't let the sun go down on your wrath,
neither give place to the devil.
Let him who stole steal no more; but rather let him labor, working with his hands the thing that is good, that he may have something to give to him who has need.
Let no corrupt speech proceed out of your mouth, but such as is good for building up as the need may be, that it may give grace to those who hear.
Don't grieve the Holy Spirit of God, in whom you were sealed for the day of redemption.
Let all bitterness, wrath, anger, outcry, and slander, be put away from you, with all malice.
And be kind to one another, tenderhearted, forgiving each other, just as God also in Christ forgave you.
Now indeed even the first covenant had ordinances of divine service, and an earthly sanctuary.
For a tabernacle was prepared. In the first part were the lampstand, the table, and the show bread; which is called the Holy Place.
After the second veil was the tabernacle which is called the Holy of Holies,
having a golden altar of incense, and the ark of the covenant overlaid on all sides with gold, in which was a golden pot holding the manna, Aaron's rod that budded, and the tablets of the covenant;
and above it cherubim of glory overshadowing the mercy seat, of which things we can't speak now in detail.
Now these things having been thus prepared, the priests go in continually into the first tabernacle, accomplishing the services,
but into the second the high priest alone, once in the year, not without blood, which he offers for himself, and for the errors of the people.
The Holy Spirit is indicating this, that the way into the Holy Place wasn't yet revealed while the first tabernacle was still standing;
which is a symbol of the present age, where gifts and sacrifices are offered that are incapable, concerning the conscience, of making the worshipper perfect;
being only (with meats and drinks and various washings) fleshly ordinances, imposed until a time of reformation.
But Christ having come as a high priest of the coming good things, through the greater and more perfect tabernacle, not made with hands, that is to say, not of this creation,
nor yet through the blood of goats and calves, but through his own blood, entered in once for all into the Holy Place, having obtained eternal redemption.
For if the blood of goats and bulls, and the ashes of a heifer sprinkling those who have been defiled, sanctify to the cleanness of the flesh:
how much more will the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without blemish to God, cleanse your conscience from dead works to serve the living God?
For this reason he is the mediator of a new covenant, since a death has occurred for the redemption of the transgressions that were under the first covenant, that those who have been called may receive the promise of the eternal inheritance.
For where a last will and testament is, there must of necessity be the death of him who made it.
For a will is in force where there has been death, for it is never in force while he who made it lives.
Therefore even the first covenant has not been dedicated without blood.
For when every commandment had been spoken by Moses to all the people according to the law, he took the blood of the calves and the goats, with water and scarlet wool and hyssop, and sprinkled both the book itself and all the people,
saying, 'This is the blood of the covenant which God has commanded you.'
Moreover he sprinkled the tabernacle and all the vessels of the ministry in like manner with the blood.
According to the law, nearly everything is cleansed with blood, and apart from shedding of blood there is no remission.
It was necessary therefore that the copies of the things in the heavens should be cleansed with these; but the heavenly things themselves with better sacrifices than these.
For Christ hasn't entered into holy places made with hands, which are representations of the true, but into heaven itself, now to appear in the presence of God for us;
nor yet that he should offer himself often, as the high priest enters into the holy place year by year with blood not his own,
or else he must have suffered often since the foundation of the world. But now once at the end of the ages, he has been revealed to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself.
Inasmuch as it is appointed for men to die once, and after this, judgment,
so Christ also, having been offered once to bear the sins of many, will appear a second time, without sin, to those who are eagerly waiting for him for salvation.
I saw, in the right hand of him who sat on the throne, a book written inside and outside, sealed shut with seven seals.
I saw a mighty angel proclaiming with a loud voice, 'Who is worthy to open the book, and to break its seals?'
No one in heaven above, or on the earth, or under the earth, was able to open the book, or to look in it.
And I wept much, because no one was found worthy to open the book, or to look in it.
One of the elders said to me, 'Don't weep. Behold, the Lion who is of the tribe of Judah, the Root of David, has overcome; he who opens the book and its seven seals.'
I saw in the midst of the throne and of the four living creatures, and in the midst of the elders, a Lamb standing, as though it had been slain, having seven horns, and seven eyes, which are the seven Spirits of God, sent out into all the earth.
Then he came, and he took it out of the right hand of him who sat on the throne.
Now when he had taken the book, the four living creatures and the twenty-four elders fell down before the Lamb, each one having a harp, and golden bowls full of incense, which are the prayers of the saints.
They sang a new song, saying, 'You are worthy to take the book, and to open its seals: for you were killed, and bought us for God with your blood, out of every tribe, language, people, and nation,
and made us kings and priests to our God, and we will reign on earth.'
I saw, and I heard something like a voice of many angels around the throne, the living creatures, and the elders; and the number of them was ten thousands of ten thousands, and thousands of thousands;
saying with a loud voice, 'Worthy is the Lamb who has been killed to receive the power, wealth, wisdom, strength, honor, glory, and blessing!'
I heard every created thing which is in heaven, on the earth, under the earth, on the sea, and everything in them, saying, 'To him who sits on the throne, and to the Lamb be the blessing, the honor, the glory, and the dominion, forever and ever! Amen!'
The four living creatures said, 'Amen!' The
Beloved, don't believe every spirit, but test the spirits, whether they are of God, because many false prophets have gone out into the world.
By this you know the Spirit of God: every spirit who confesses that Jesus Christ has come in the flesh is of God,
and every spirit who doesn't confess that Jesus Christ has come in the flesh is not of God, and this is the spirit of the antichrist, of whom you have heard that it comes. Now it is in the world already.
You are of God, little children, and have overcome them; because greater is he who is in you than he who is in the world.
They are of the world. Therefore they speak of the world, and the world hears them.
We are of God. He who knows God listens to us. He who is not of God doesn't listen to us. By this we know the spirit of truth, and the spirit of error.
Beloved, let us love one another, for love is of God; and everyone who loves is born of God, and knows God.
He who doesn't love doesn't know God, for God is love.
By this God's love was revealed in us, that God has sent his one and only Son into the world that we might live through him.
In this is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son as the atoning sacrifice for our sins.
Beloved, if God loved us in this way, we also ought to love one another.
No one has seen God at any time. If we love one another, God remains in us, and his love has been perfected in us.
By this we know that we remain in him and he in us, because he has given us of his Spirit.
We have seen and testify that the Father has sent the Son as the Savior of the world.
Whoever confesses that Jesus is the Son of God, God remains in him, and he in God.
We know and have believed the love which God has for us. God is love, and he who remains in love remains in God, and God remains in him.
In this love has been made perfect among us, that we may have boldness in the day of judgment, because as he is, even so are we in this world.
There is no fear in love; but perfect love casts out fear, because fear has punishment. He who fears is not made perfect in love.
We love Him, because he first loved us.
If a man says, 'I love God,' and hates his brother, he is a liar; for he who doesn't love his brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen?
This commandment we have from him, that he who loves God should also love his brother.
On that day Jesus went out of the house, and sat by the seaside.
Great multitudes gathered to him, so that he entered into a boat, and sat, and all the multitude stood on the beach.
He spoke to them many things in parables, saying, 'Behold, a farmer went out to sow.
As he sowed, some seeds fell by the roadside, and the birds came and devoured them.
Others fell on rocky ground, where they didn't have much soil, and immediately they sprang up, because they had no depth of earth.
When the sun had risen, they were scorched. Because they had no root, they withered away.
Others fell among thorns. The thorns grew up and choked them.
Others fell on good soil, and yielded fruit: some one hundred times as much, some sixty, and some thirty.
He who has ears to hear, let him hear.'
The disciples came, and said to him, 'Why do you speak to them in parables?'
He answered them, 'To you it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, but it is not given to them.
For whoever has, to him will be given, and he will have abundance, but whoever doesn't have, from him will be taken away even that which he has.
Therefore I speak to them in parables, because seeing they don't see, and hearing, they don't hear, neither do they understand.
In them the prophecy of Isaiah is fulfilled, which says,  'By hearing you will hear, and will in no way understand; Seeing you will see, and will in no way perceive:
for this people's heart has grown callous, their ears are dull of hearing, they have closed their eyes; or else perhaps they might perceive with their eyes, hear with their ears, understand with their heart, and should turn again; and I would heal them.'
'But blessed are your eyes, for they see; and your ears, for they hear.
For most certainly I tell you that many prophets and righteous men desired to see the things which you see, and didn't see them; and to hear the things which you hear, and didn't hear them.
'Hear, then, the parable of the farmer.
When anyone hears the word of the Kingdom, and doesn't understand it, the evil one comes, and snatches away that which has been sown in his heart. This is what was sown by the roadside.
What was sown on the rocky places, this is he who hears the word, and immediately with joy receives it;
yet he has no root in himself, but endures for a while. When oppression or persecution arises because of the word, immediately he stumbles.
What was sown among the thorns, this is he who hears the word, but the cares of this age and the deceitfulness of riches choke the word, and he becomes unfruitful.
What was sown on the good ground, this is he who hears the word, and understands it, who most certainly bears fruit, and brings forth, some one hundred times as much, some sixty, and some thirty.'
He set another parable before them, saying, 'The Kingdom of Heaven is like a man who sowed good seed in his field,
but while people slept, his enemy came and sowed darnel weeds also among the wheat, and went away.
But when the blade sprang up and brought forth fruit, then the darnel weeds appeared also.
The servants of the householder came and said to him, 'Sir, didn't you sow good seed in your field? Where did this darnel come from?'
'He said to them, 'An enemy has done this.' 'The servants asked him, 'Do you want us to go and gather them up?'
'But he said, 'No, lest perhaps while you gather up the darnel weeds, you root up the wheat with them.
Let both grow together until the harvest, and in the harvest time I will tell the reapers, 'First, gather up the darnel weeds, and bind them in bundles to burn them; but gather the wheat into my barn.'''
He set another parable before them, saying, 'The Kingdom of Heaven is like a grain of mustard seed, which a man took, and sowed in his field;
which indeed is smaller than all seeds. But when it is grown, it is greater than the herbs, and becomes a tree, so that the birds of the air come and lodge in its branches.'
He spoke another parable to them. 'The Kingdom of Heaven is like yeast, which a woman took, and hid in three measures of meal, until it was all leavened.'
Jesus spoke all these things in parables to the multitudes; and without a parable, he didn't speak to them,
that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through the prophet, saying,  'I will open my mouth in parables; I will utter things hidden from the foundation of the world.'
Then Jesus sent the multitudes away, and went into the house. His disciples came to him, saying, 'Explain to us the parable of the darnel weeds of the field.'
He answered them, 'He who sows the good seed is the Son of Man,
the field is the world; and the good seed, these are the children of the Kingdom; and the darnel weeds are the children of the evil one.
The enemy who sowed them is the devil. The harvest is the end of the age, and the reapers are angels.
As therefore the darnel weeds are gathered up and burned with fire; so will it be at the end of this age.
The Son of Man will send out his angels, and they will gather out of his Kingdom all things that cause stumbling, and those who do iniquity,
and will cast them into the furnace of fire. There will be weeping and the gnashing of teeth.
Then the righteous will shine forth like the sun in the Kingdom of their Father. He who has ears to hear, let him hear.
'Again, the Kingdom of Heaven is like a treasure hidden in the field, which a man found, and hid. In his joy, he goes and sells all that he has, and buys that field.
'Again, the Kingdom of Heaven is like a man who is a merchant seeking fine pearls,
who having found one pearl of great price, he went and sold all that he had, and bought it.
'Again, the Kingdom of Heaven is like a dragnet, that was cast into the sea, and gathered some fish of every kind,
which, when it was filled, they drew up on the beach. They sat down, and gathered the good into containers, but the bad they threw away.
So will it be in the end of the world. The angels will come forth, and separate the wicked from among the righteous,
and will cast them into the furnace of fire. There will be the weeping and the gnashing of teeth.'
Jesus said to them, 'Have you understood all these things?' They answered him, 'Yes, Lord.'
He said to them, 'Therefore, every scribe who has been made a disciple in the Kingdom of Heaven is like a man who is a householder, who brings out of his treasure new and old things.'
It happened that when Jesus had finished these parables, he departed from there.
Coming into his own country, he taught them in their synagogue, so that they were astonished, and said, 'Where did this man get this wisdom, and these mighty works?
Isn't this the carpenter's son? Isn't his mother called Mary, and his brothers, James, Joses, Simon, and Judas?
Aren't all of his sisters with us? Where then did this man get all of these things?'
They were offended by him. But Jesus said to them, 'A prophet is not without honor, except in his own country, and in his own house.'
He didn't do many mighty works there because of their unbelief.
I ask then, did God reject his people? May it never be! For I also am an Israelite, a descendant of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin.
God didn't reject his people, which he foreknew. Or don't you know what the Scripture says about Elijah? How he pleads with God against Israel:
'Lord, they have killed your prophets, they have broken down your altars; and I am left alone, and they seek my life.'
But how does God answer him? 'I have reserved for myself seven thousand men, who have not bowed the knee to Baal.'
Even so then at this present time also there is a remnant according to the election of grace.
And if by grace, then it is no longer of works; otherwise grace is no longer grace. But if it is of works, it is no longer grace; otherwise work is no longer work.
What then? That which Israel seeks for, that he didn't obtain, but the chosen ones obtained it, and the rest were hardened.
According as it is written, 'God gave them a spirit of stupor, eyes that they should not see, and ears that they should not hear, to this very day.'
David says, 'Let their table be made a snare, and a trap, a stumbling block, and a retribution to them.
Let their eyes be darkened, that they may not see. Bow down their back always.'
I ask then, did they stumble that they might fall? May it never be! But by their fall salvation has come to the Gentiles, to provoke them to jealousy.
Now if their fall is the riches of the world, and their loss the riches of the Gentiles; how much more their fullness?
For I speak to you who are Gentiles. Since then as I am an apostle to Gentiles, I glorify my ministry;
if by any means I may provoke to jealousy those who are my flesh, and may save some of them.
For if the rejection of them is the reconciling of the world, what would their acceptance be, but life from the dead?
If the first fruit is holy, so is the lump. If the root is holy, so are the branches.
But if some of the branches were broken off, and you, being a wild olive, were grafted in among them, and became partaker with them of the root and of the richness of the olive tree;
don't boast over the branches. But if you boast, it is not you who support the root, but the root supports you.
You will say then, 'Branches were broken off, that I might be grafted in.'
True; by their unbelief they were broken off, and you stand by your faith. Don't be conceited, but fear;
for if God didn't spare the natural branches, neither will he spare you.
See then the goodness and severity of God. Toward those who fell, severity; but toward you, goodness, if you continue in his goodness; otherwise you also will be cut off.
They also, if they don't continue in their unbelief, will be grafted in, for God is able to graft them in again.
For if you were cut out of that which is by nature a wild olive tree, and were grafted contrary to nature into a good olive tree, how much more will these, which are the natural branches, be grafted into their own olive tree?
For I don't desire you to be ignorant, brothers, of this mystery, so that you won't be wise in your own conceits, that a partial hardening has happened to Israel, until the fullness of the Gentiles has come in,
and so all Israel will be saved. Even as it is written, 'There will come out of Zion the Deliverer, and he will turn away ungodliness from Jacob.
This is my covenant to them, when I will take away their sins.'
Concerning the Good News, they are enemies for your sake. But concerning the election, they are beloved for the fathers' sake.
For the gifts and the calling of God are irrevocable.
For as you in time past were disobedient to God, but now have obtained mercy by their disobedience,
even so these also have now been disobedient, that by the mercy shown to you they may also obtain mercy.
For God has shut up all to disobedience, that he might have mercy on all.
Oh the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and the knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past tracing out!
'For who has known the mind of the Lord? Or who has been his counselor?'
'Or who has first given to him, and it will be repaid to him again?'
For of him, and through him, and to him, are all things. To him be the glory for ever! Amen.
Seeing the multitudes, he went up onto the mountain. When he had sat down, his disciples came to him.
He opened his mouth and taught them, saying,
'Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.
Blessed are those who mourn, for they shall be comforted.
Blessed are the gentle, for they shall inherit the earth.
Blessed are those who hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled.
Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.
Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.
Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called children of God.
Blessed are those who have been persecuted for righteousness' sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.
'Blessed are you when people reproach you, persecute you, and say all kinds of evil against you falsely, for my sake.
Rejoice, and be exceedingly glad, for great is your reward in heaven. For that is how they persecuted the prophets who were before you.
'You are the salt of the earth, but if the salt has lost its flavor, with what will it be salted? It is then good for nothing, but to be cast out and trodden under the feet of men.
You are the light of the world. A city located on a hill can't be hidden.
Neither do you light a lamp, and put it under a measuring basket, but on a stand; and it shines to all who are in the house.
Even so, let your light shine before men; that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father who is in heaven.
'Don't think that I came to destroy the law or the prophets. I didn't come to destroy, but to fulfill.
For most certainly, I tell you, until heaven and earth pass away, not even one smallest letter shall in any way pass away from the law, until all things are accomplished.
Whoever, therefore, shall break one of these least commandments, and teach others to do so, shall be called least in the Kingdom of Heaven; but whoever shall do and teach them shall be called great in the Kingdom of Heaven.
For I tell you that unless your righteousness exceeds that of the scribes and Pharisees, there is no way you will enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.
'You have heard that it was said to the ancient ones, 'You shall not murder;' and 'Whoever shall murder shall be in danger of the judgment.'
But I tell you, that everyone who is angry with his brother without a cause
'If therefore you are offering your gift at the altar, and there remember that your brother has anything against you,
leave your gift there before the altar, and go your way. First be reconciled to your brother, and then come and offer your gift.
Agree with your adversary quickly, while you are with him in the way; lest perhaps the prosecutor deliver you to the judge, and the judge deliver you to the officer, and you be cast into prison.
Most certainly I tell you, you shall by no means get out of there, until you have paid the last penny.
'You have heard that it was said,
but I tell you that everyone who gazes at a woman to lust after her has committed adultery with her already in his heart.
If your right eye causes you to stumble, pluck it out and throw it away from you. For it is more profitable for you that one of your members should perish, than for your whole body to be cast into Gehenna.
If your right hand causes you to stumble, cut it off, and throw it away from you. For it is more profitable for you that one of your members should perish, than for your whole body to be cast into Gehenna.
'It was also said, 'Whoever shall put away his wife, let him give her a writing of divorce,'
but I tell you that whoever puts away his wife, except for the cause of sexual immorality, makes her an adulteress; and whoever marries her when she is put away commits adultery.
'Again you have heard that it was said to them of old time, 'You shall not make false vows, but shall perform to the Lord your vows,'
but I tell you, don't swear at all: neither by heaven, for it is the throne of God;
nor by the earth, for it is the footstool of his feet; nor by Jerusalem, for it is the city of the great King.
Neither shall you swear by your head, for you can't make one hair white or black.
But let your 'Yes' be 'Yes' and your 'No' be 'No.' Whatever is more than these is of the evil one.
'You have heard that it was said, 'An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth.'
But I tell you, don't resist him who is evil; but whoever strikes you on your right cheek, turn to him the other also.
If anyone sues you to take away your coat, let him have your cloak also.
Whoever compels you to go one mile, go with him two.
Give to him who asks you, and don't turn away him who desires to borrow from you.
'You have heard that it was said, 'You shall love your neighbor,'
But I tell you, love your enemies, bless those who curse you, do good to those who hate you, and pray for those who mistreat you and persecute you,
that you may be children of your Father who is in heaven. For he makes his sun to rise on the evil and the good, and sends rain on the just and the unjust.
For if you love those who love you, what reward do you have? Don't even the tax collectors do the same?
If you only greet your friends, what more do you do than others? Don't even the tax collectors do the same?
Therefore you shall be perfect, just as your Father in heaven is perfect.
Or don't you know, brothers (for I speak to men who know the law), that the law has dominion over a man for as long as he lives?
For the woman that has a husband is bound by law to the husband while he lives, but if the husband dies, she is discharged from the law of the husband.
So then if, while the husband lives, she is joined to another man, she would be called an adulteress. But if the husband dies, she is free from the law, so that she is no adulteress, though she is joined to another man.
Therefore, my brothers, you also were made dead to the law through the body of Christ, that you would be joined to another, to him who was raised from the dead, that we might bring forth fruit to God.
For when we were in the flesh, the sinful passions which were through the law, worked in our members to bring forth fruit to death.
But now we have been discharged from the law, having died to that in which we were held; so that we serve in newness of the spirit, and not in oldness of the letter.
What shall we say then? Is the law sin? May it never be! However, I wouldn't have known sin, except through the law. For I wouldn't have known coveting, unless the law had said, 'You shall not covet.'
But sin, finding occasion through the commandment, produced in me all kinds of coveting. For apart from the law, sin is dead.
I was alive apart from the law once, but when the commandment came, sin revived, and I died.
The commandment, which was for life, this I found to be for death;
for sin, finding occasion through the commandment, deceived me, and through it killed me.
Therefore the law indeed is holy, and the commandment holy, and righteous, and good.
Did then that which is good become death to me? May it never be! But sin, that it might be shown to be sin, by working death to me through that which is good; that through the commandment sin might become exceeding sinful.
For we know that the law is spiritual, but I am fleshly, sold under sin.
For I don't know what I am doing. For I don't practice what I desire to do; but what I hate, that I do.
But if what I don't desire, that I do, I consent to the law that it is good.
So now it is no more I that do it, but sin which dwells in me.
For I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, dwells no good thing. For desire is present with me, but I don't find it doing that which is good.
For the good which I desire, I don't do; but the evil which I don't desire, that I practice.
But if what I don't desire, that I do, it is no more I that do it, but sin which dwells in me.
I find then the law, that, to me, while I desire to do good, evil is present.
For I delight in God's law after the inward man,
but I see a different law in my members, warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity under the law of sin which is in my members.
What a wretched man I am! Who will deliver me out of the body of this death?
I thank God through Jesus Christ, our Lord! So then with the mind, I myself serve God's law, but with the flesh, the sin's law.
Agrippa said to Paul, 'You may speak for yourself.' Then Paul stretched out his hand, and made his defense.
'I think myself happy, King Agrippa, that I am to make my defense before you this day concerning all the things that I am accused by the Jews,
especially because you are expert in all customs and questions which are among the Jews. Therefore I beg you to hear me patiently.
'Indeed, all the Jews know my way of life from my youth up, which was from the beginning among my own nation and at Jerusalem;
having known me from the first, if they are willing to testify, that after the strictest sect of our religion I lived a Pharisee.
Now I stand here to be judged for the hope of the promise made by God to our fathers,
which our twelve tribes, earnestly serving night and day, hope to attain. Concerning this hope I am accused by the Jews, King Agrippa!
Why is it judged incredible with you, if God does raise the dead?
'I myself most certainly thought that I ought to do many things contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth.
This I also did in Jerusalem. I both shut up many of the saints in prisons, having received authority from the chief priests, and when they were put to death I gave my vote against them.
Punishing them often in all the synagogues, I tried to make them blaspheme. Being exceedingly enraged against them, I persecuted them even to foreign cities.
'Whereupon as I traveled to Damascus with the authority and commission from the chief priests,
at noon, O King, I saw on the way a light from the sky, brighter than the sun, shining around me and those who traveled with me.
When we had all fallen to the earth, I heard a voice saying to me in the Hebrew language, 'Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me? It is hard for you to kick against the goads.'
'I said, 'Who are you, Lord?' 'He said, 'I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting.
But arise, and stand on your feet, for I have appeared to you for this purpose: to appoint you a servant and a witness both of the things which you have seen, and of the things which I will reveal to you;
delivering you from the people, and from the Gentiles, to whom I send you,
to open their eyes, that they may turn from darkness to light and from the power of Satan to God, that they may receive remission of sins and an inheritance among those who are sanctified by faith in me.'
'Therefore, King Agrippa, I was not disobedient to the heavenly vision,
but declared first to them of Damascus, at Jerusalem, and throughout all the country of Judea, and also to the Gentiles, that they should repent and turn to God, doing works worthy of repentance.
For this reason the Jews seized me in the temple, and tried to kill me.
Having therefore obtained the help that is from God, I stand to this day testifying both to small and great, saying nothing but what the prophets and Moses said would happen,
how the Christ must suffer, and how, by the resurrection of the dead, he would be first to proclaim light both to these people and to the Gentiles.'
As he thus made his defense, Festus said with a loud voice, 'Paul, you are crazy! Your great learning is driving you insane!'
But he said, 'I am not crazy, most excellent Festus, but boldly declare words of truth and reasonableness.
For the king knows of these things, to whom also I speak freely. For I am persuaded that none of these things is hidden from him, for this has not been done in a corner.
King Agrippa, do you believe the prophets? I know that you believe.'
Agrippa said to Paul, 'With a little persuasion are you trying to make me a Christian?'
Paul said, 'I pray to God, that whether with little or with much, not only you, but also all that hear me this day, might become such as I am, except for these bonds.'
The king rose up with the governor, and Bernice, and those who sat with them.
When they had withdrawn, they spoke one to another, saying, 'This man does nothing worthy of death or of bonds.'
Agrippa said to Festus, 'This man might have been set free if he had not appealed to Caesar.'
It happened soon afterwards, that he went about through cities and villages, preaching and bringing the good news of the Kingdom of God. With him were the twelve,
and certain women who had been healed of evil spirits and infirmities: Mary who was called Magdalene, from whom seven demons had gone out;
and Joanna, the wife of Chuzas, Herod's steward; Susanna; and many others; who served them from their possessions.
When a great multitude came together, and people from every city were coming to him, he spoke by a parable.
'The farmer went out to sow his seed. As he sowed, some fell along the road, and it was trampled under foot, and the birds of the sky devoured it.
Other seed fell on the rock, and as soon as it grew, it withered away, because it had no moisture.
Other fell amid the thorns, and the thorns grew with it, and choked it.
Other fell into the good ground, and grew, and brought forth fruit one hundred times.' As he said these things, he called out, 'He who has ears to hear, let him hear!'
Then his disciples asked him, 'What does this parable mean?'
He said, 'To you it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of God, but to the rest in parables; that 'seeing they may not see, and hearing they may not understand.'
Now the parable is this: The seed is the word of God.
Those along the road are those who hear, then the devil comes, and takes away the word from their heart, that they may not believe and be saved.
Those on the rock are they who, when they hear, receive the word with joy; but these have no root, who believe for a while, then fall away in time of temptation.
That which fell among the thorns, these are those who have heard, and as they go on their way they are choked with cares, riches, and pleasures of life, and bring no fruit to maturity.
That in the good ground, these are such as in an honest and good heart, having heard the word, hold it tightly, and bring forth fruit with patience.
'No one, when he has lit a lamp, covers it with a container, or puts it under a bed; but puts it on a stand, that those who enter in may see the light.
For nothing is hidden, that will not be revealed; nor anything secret, that will not be known and come to light.
Be careful therefore how you hear. For whoever has, to him will be given; and whoever doesn't have, from him will be taken away even that which he thinks he has.'
His mother and brothers came to him, and they could not come near him for the crowd.
It was told him by some saying, 'Your mother and your brothers stand outside, desiring to see you.'
But he answered them, 'My mother and my brothers are these who hear the word of God, and do it.'
Now it happened on one of those days, that he entered into a boat, himself and his disciples, and he said to them, 'Let's go over to the other side of the lake.' So they launched out.
But as they sailed, he fell asleep. A wind storm came down on the lake, and they were taking on dangerous amounts of water.
They came to him, and awoke him, saying, 'Master, master, we are dying!' He awoke, and rebuked the wind and the raging of the water, and they ceased, and it was calm.
He said to them, 'Where is your faith?' Being afraid they marveled, saying one to another, 'Who is this, then, that he commands even the winds and the water, and they obey him?'
They arrived at the country of the Gadarenes, which is opposite Galilee.
When Jesus stepped ashore, a certain man out of the city who had demons for a long time met him. He wore no clothes, and didn't live in a house, but in the tombs.
When he saw Jesus, he cried out, and fell down before him, and with a loud voice said, 'What do I have to do with you, Jesus, you Son of the Most High God? I beg you, don't torment me!'
For Jesus was commanding the unclean spirit to come out of the man. For the unclean spirit had often seized the man. He was kept under guard, and bound with chains and fetters. Breaking the bands apart, he was driven by the demon into the desert.
Jesus asked him, 'What is your name?' He said, 'Legion,' for many demons had entered into him.
They begged him that he would not command them to go into the abyss.
Now there was there a herd of many pigs feeding on the mountain, and they begged him that he would allow them to enter into those. He allowed them.
The demons came out from the man, and entered into the pigs, and the herd rushed down the steep bank into the lake, and were drowned.
When those who fed them saw what had happened, they fled, and told it in the city and in the country.
People went out to see what had happened. They came to Jesus, and found the man from whom the demons had gone out, sitting at Jesus' feet, clothed and in his right mind; and they were afraid.
Those who saw it told them how he who had been possessed by demons was healed.
All the people of the surrounding country of the Gadarenes asked him to depart from them, for they were very much afraid. He entered into the boat, and returned.
But the man from whom the demons had gone out begged him that he might go with him, but Jesus sent him away, saying,
'Return to your house, and declare what great things God has done for you.' He went his way, proclaiming throughout the whole city what great things Jesus had done for him.
It happened, when Jesus returned, that the multitude welcomed him, for they were all waiting for him.
Behold, there came a man named Jairus, and he was a ruler of the synagogue. He fell down at Jesus' feet, and begged him to come into his house,
for he had an only daughter, about twelve years of age, and she was dying. But as he went, the multitudes pressed against him.
A woman who had a flow of blood for twelve years, who had spent all her living on physicians, and could not be healed by any,
came behind him, and touched the fringe of his cloak, and immediately the flow of her blood stopped.
Jesus said, 'Who touched me?' When all denied it, Peter and those with him said, 'Master, the multitudes press and jostle you, and you say, 'Who touched me?''
But Jesus said, 'Someone did touch me, for I perceived that power has gone out of me.'
When the woman saw that she was not hidden, she came trembling, and falling down before him declared to him in the presence of all the people the reason why she had touched him, and how she was healed immediately.
He said to her, 'Daughter, cheer up. Your faith has made you well. Go in peace.'
While he still spoke, one from the ruler of the synagogue's house came, saying to him, 'Your daughter is dead. Don't trouble the Teacher.'
But Jesus hearing it, answered him, 'Don't be afraid. Only believe, and she will be healed.'
When he came to the house, he didn't allow anyone to enter in, except Peter, John, James, the father of the child, and her mother.
All were weeping and mourning her, but he said, 'Don't weep. She isn't dead, but sleeping.'
They were ridiculing him, knowing that she was dead.
But he put them all outside, and taking her by the hand, he called, saying, 'Child, arise!'
Her spirit returned, and she rose up immediately. He commanded that something be given to her to eat.
Her parents were amazed, but he commanded them to tell no one what had been done.
Then I stood on the sand of the sea. I saw a beast coming up out of the sea, having ten horns and seven heads. On his horns were ten crowns, and on his heads, blasphemous names.
The beast which I saw was like a leopard, and his feet were like those of a bear, and his mouth like the mouth of a lion. The dragon gave him his power, his throne, and great authority.
One of his heads looked like it had been wounded fatally. His fatal wound was healed, and the whole earth marveled at the beast.
They worshiped the dragon, because he gave his authority to the beast, and they worshiped the beast, saying, 'Who is like the beast? Who is able to make war with him?'
A mouth speaking great things and blasphemy was given to him. Authority to make war for forty-two months was given to him.
He opened his mouth for blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name, and his dwelling, those who dwell in heaven.
It was given to him to make war with the saints, and to overcome them. Authority over every tribe, people, language, and nation was given to him.
All who dwell on the earth will worship him, everyone whose name has not been written from the foundation of the world in the book of life of the Lamb who has been killed.
If anyone has an ear, let him hear.
If anyone has captivity, he will go into captivity. If anyone is with the sword, he must be killed. Here is the endurance and the faith of the saints.
I saw another beast coming up out of the earth. He had two horns like a lamb, and he spoke like a dragon.
He exercises all the authority of the first beast in his presence. He makes the earth and those who dwell in it to worship the first beast, whose fatal wound was healed.
He performs great signs, even making fire come down out of the sky to the earth in the sight of people.
He deceives my own people who dwell on the earth because of the signs he was granted to do in front of the beast; saying to those who dwell on the earth, that they should make an image to the beast who had the sword wound and lived.
It was given to him to give breath to it, to the image of the beast, that the image of the beast should both speak, and cause as many as wouldn't worship the image of the beast to be killed.
He causes all, the small and the great, the rich and the poor, and the free and the slave, to be given marks on their right hands, or on their foreheads;
and that no one would be able to buy or to sell, unless he has that mark, the name of the beast or the number of his name.
Here is wisdom. He who has understanding, let him calculate the number of the beast, for it is the number of a man. His number is six hundred sixty-six.
A great sign was seen in heaven: a woman clothed with the sun, and the moon under her feet, and on her head a crown of twelve stars.
She was with child. She cried out in pain, laboring to give birth.
Another sign was seen in heaven. Behold, a great red dragon, having seven heads and ten horns, and on his heads seven crowns.
His tail drew one third of the stars of the sky, and threw them to the earth. The dragon stood before the woman who was about to give birth, so that when she gave birth he might devour her child.
She gave birth to a son, a male child, who is to rule all the nations with a rod of iron. Her child was caught up to God, and to his throne.
The woman fled into the wilderness, where she has a place prepared by God, that there they may nourish her one thousand two hundred sixty days.
There was war in the sky. Michael and his angels made war on the dragon. The dragon and his angels made war.
They didn't prevail, neither was a place found for him any more in heaven.
The great dragon was thrown down, the old serpent, he who is called the devil and Satan, the deceiver of the whole world. He was thrown down to the earth, and his angels were thrown down with him.
I heard a loud voice in heaven, saying, 'Now is come the salvation, the power, and the Kingdom of our God, and the authority of his Christ; for the accuser of our brothers has been thrown down, who accuses them before our God day and night.
They overcame him because of the Lamb's blood, and because of the word of their testimony. They didn't love their life, even to death.
Therefore rejoice, heavens, and you who dwell in them. Woe to the earth and to the sea, because the devil has gone down to you, having great wrath, knowing that he has but a short time.'
When the dragon saw that he was thrown down to the earth, he persecuted the woman who gave birth to the male child.
Two wings of the great eagle were given to the woman, that she might fly into the wilderness to her place, so that she might be nourished for a time, and times, and half a time, from the face of the serpent.
The serpent spewed water out of his mouth after the woman like a river, that he might cause her to be carried away by the stream.
The earth helped the woman, and the earth opened its mouth and swallowed up the river which the dragon spewed out of his mouth.
The dragon grew angry with the woman, and went away to make war with the rest of her seed, who keep God's commandments and hold Jesus' testimony.

He called the twelve together, and gave them power and authority over all demons, and to cure diseases.
He sent them forth to preach the Kingdom of God, and to heal the sick.
He said to them, 'Take nothing for your journey--neither staffs, nor wallet, nor bread, nor money; neither have two coats apiece.
Into whatever house you enter, stay there, and depart from there.
As many as don't receive you, when you depart from that city, shake off even the dust from your feet for a testimony against them.'
They departed, and went throughout the villages, preaching the Good News, and healing everywhere.
Now Herod the tetrarch heard of all that was done by him; and he was very perplexed, because it was said by some that John had risen from the dead,
and by some that Elijah had appeared, and by others that one of the old prophets had risen again.
Herod said, 'John I beheaded, but who is this, about whom I hear such things?' He sought to see him.
The apostles, when they had returned, told him what things they had done. He took them, and withdrew apart to a deserted place of a city called Bethsaida.
But the multitudes, perceiving it, followed him. He welcomed them, and spoke to them of the Kingdom of God, and he cured those who needed healing.
The day began to wear away; and the twelve came, and said to him, 'Send the multitude away, that they may go into the surrounding villages and farms, and lodge, and get food, for we are here in a deserted place.'
But he said to them, 'You give them something to eat.' They said, 'We have no more than five loaves and two fish, unless we should go and buy food for all these people.'
For they were about five thousand men. He said to his disciples, 'Make them sit down in groups of about fifty each.'
They did so, and made them all sit down.
He took the five loaves and the two fish, and looking up to the sky, he blessed them, and broke them, and gave them to the disciples to set before the multitude.
They ate, and were all filled. They gathered up twelve baskets of broken pieces that were left over.
It happened, as he was praying alone, that the disciples were with him, and he asked them, 'Who do the multitudes say that I am?'
They answered, ''John the Baptizer,' but others say, 'Elijah,' and others, that one of the old prophets is risen again.'
He said to them, 'But who do you say that I am?' Peter answered, 'The Christ of God.'
But he warned them, and commanded them to tell this to no one,
saying, 'The Son of Man must suffer many things, and be rejected by the elders, chief priests, and scribes, and be killed, and the third day be raised up.'
He said to all, 'If anyone desires to come after me, let him deny himself, take up his cross, and follow me.
For whoever desires to save his life will lose it, but whoever will lose his life for my sake, the same will save it.
For what does it profit a man if he gains the whole world, and loses or forfeits his own self?
For whoever will be ashamed of me and of my words, of him will the Son of Man be ashamed, when he comes in his glory, and the glory of the Father, and of the holy angels.
But I tell you the truth: There are some of those who stand here, who will in no way taste of death, until they see the Kingdom of God.'
It happened about eight days after these sayings, that he took with him Peter, John, and James, and went up onto the mountain to pray.
As he was praying, the appearance of his face was altered, and his clothing became white and dazzling.
Behold, two men were talking with him, who were Moses and Elijah,
who appeared in glory, and spoke of his departure, which he was about to accomplish at Jerusalem.
Now Peter and those who were with him were heavy with sleep, but when they were fully awake, they saw his glory, and the two men who stood with him.
It happened, as they were parting from him, that Peter said to Jesus, 'Master, it is good for us to be here. Let's make three tents: one for you, and one for Moses, and one for Elijah,' not knowing what he said.
While he said these things, a cloud came and overshadowed them, and they were afraid as they entered into the cloud.
A voice came out of the cloud, saying, 'This is my beloved Son. Listen to him!'
When the voice came, Jesus was found alone. They were silent, and told no one in those days any of the things which they had seen.
It happened on the next day, when they had come down from the mountain, that a great multitude met him.
Behold, a man from the crowd called out, saying, 'Teacher, I beg you to look at my son, for he is my only child.
Behold, a spirit takes him, he suddenly cries out, and it convulses him so that he foams, and it hardly departs from him, bruising him severely.
I begged your disciples to cast it out, and they couldn't.'
Jesus answered, 'Faithless and perverse generation, how long shall I be with you and bear with you? Bring your son here.'
While he was still coming, the demon threw him down and convulsed him violently. But Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit, and healed the boy, and gave him back to his father.
They were all astonished at the majesty of God. But while all were marveling at all the things which Jesus did, he said to his disciples,
'Let these words sink into your ears, for the Son of Man will be delivered up into the hands of men.'
But they didn't understand this saying. It was concealed from them, that they should not perceive it, and they were afraid to ask him about this saying.
There arose an argument among them about which of them was the greatest.
Jesus, perceiving the reasoning of their hearts, took a little child, and set him by his side,
and said to them, 'Whoever receives this little child in my name receives me. Whoever receives me receives him who sent me. For whoever is least among you all, this one will be great.'
John answered, 'Master, we saw someone casting out demons in your name, and we forbade him, because he doesn't follow with us.'
Jesus said to him, 'Don't forbid him, for he who is not against us is for us.'
It came to pass, when the days were near that he should be taken up, he intently set his face to go to Jerusalem,
and sent messengers before his face. They went, and entered into a village of the Samaritans, so as to prepare for him.
They didn't receive him, because he was traveling with his face set towards Jerusalem.
When his disciples, James and John, saw this, they said, 'Lord, do you want us to command fire to come down from the sky, and destroy them, just as Elijah did?'
But he turned and rebuked them, 'You don't know of what kind of spirit you are.
For the Son of Man didn't come to destroy men's lives, but to save them.' They went to another village.
As they went on the way, a certain man said to him, 'I want to follow you wherever you go, Lord.'
Jesus said to him, 'The foxes have holes, and the birds of the sky have nests, but the Son of Man has no place to lay his head.'
He said to another, 'Follow me!' But he said, 'Lord, allow me first to go and bury my father.'
But Jesus said to him, 'Leave the dead to bury their own dead, but you go and announce the Kingdom of God.'
Another also said, 'I want to follow you, Lord, but first allow me to bid farewell to those who are at my house.'
But Jesus said to him, 'No one, having put his hand to the plow, and looking back, is fit for the Kingdom of God.'
Masters, give to your servants that which is just and equal, knowing that you also have a Master in heaven.
Continue steadfastly in prayer, watching therein with thanksgiving;
praying together for us also, that God may open to us a door for the word, to speak the mystery of Christ, for which I am also in bonds;
that I may reveal it as I ought to speak.
Walk in wisdom toward those who are outside, redeeming the time.
Let your speech always be with grace, seasoned with salt, that you may know how you ought to answer each one.
All my affairs will be made known to you by Tychicus, the beloved brother, faithful servant, and fellow bondservant in the Lord.
I am sending him to you for this very purpose, that he may know your circumstances and comfort your hearts,
together with Onesimus, the faithful and beloved brother, who is one of you. They will make known to you everything that is going on here.
Aristarchus, my fellow prisoner greets you, and Mark, the cousin of Barnabas (concerning whom you received commandments, 'if he comes to you, receive him'),
and Jesus who is called Justus, who are of the circumcision. These are my only fellow workers for the Kingdom of God, men who have been a comfort to me.
Epaphras, who is one of you, a servant of Christ, salutes you, always striving for you in his prayers, that you may stand perfect and complete in all the will of God.
For I testify about him, that he has great zeal for you, and for those in Laodicea, and for those in Hierapolis.
Luke, the beloved physician, and Demas greet you.
Greet the brothers who are in Laodicea, and Nymphas, and the assembly that is in his house.
When this letter has been read among you, cause it to be read also in the assembly of the Laodiceans; and that you also read the letter from Laodicea.
Tell Archippus, 'Take heed to the ministry which you have received in the Lord, that you fulfill it.'
The salutation of me, Paul, with my own hand: remember my bonds. Grace be with you. Amen.
Then Jesus was led up by the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted by the devil.
When he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was hungry afterward.
The tempter came and said to him, 'If you are the Son of God, command that these stones become bread.'
But he answered, 'It is written, 'Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God.''
Then the devil took him into the holy city. He set him on the pinnacle of the temple,
and said to him, 'If you are the Son of God, throw yourself down, for it is written, 'He will put his angels in charge of you.' and, 'On their hands they will bear you up, so that you don't dash your foot against a stone.''
Jesus said to him, 'Again, it is written, 'You shall not test the Lord, your God.''
Again, the devil took him to an exceedingly high mountain, and showed him all the kingdoms of the world, and their glory.
He said to him, 'I will give you all of these things, if you will fall down and worship me.'
Then Jesus said to him, 'Get behind me,
Then the devil left him, and behold, angels came and served him.
Now when Jesus heard that John was delivered up, he withdrew into Galilee.
Leaving Nazareth, he came and lived in Capernaum, which is by the sea, in the region of Zebulun and Naphtali,
that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through Isaiah the prophet, saying,
'The land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali, toward the sea, beyond the Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles,
the people who sat in darkness saw a great light, to those who sat in the region and shadow of death, to them light has dawned.'
From that time, Jesus began to preach, and to say, 'Repent! For the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand.'
Walking by the sea of Galilee, he saw two brothers: Simon, who is called Peter, and Andrew, his brother, casting a net into the sea; for they were fishermen.
He said to them, 'Come after me, and I will make you fishers for men.'
They immediately left their nets and followed him.
Going on from there, he saw two other brothers, James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother, in the boat with Zebedee their father, mending their nets. He called them.
They immediately left the boat and their father, and followed him.
Jesus went about in all Galilee, teaching in their synagogues, preaching the Good News of the Kingdom, and healing every disease and every sickness among the people.
The report about him went out into all Syria. They brought to him all who were sick, afflicted with various diseases and torments, possessed with demons, epileptics, and paralytics; and he healed them.
Great multitudes from Galilee, Decapolis, Jerusalem, Judea and from beyond the Jordan followed him.
What shall we say then? Shall we continue in sin, that grace may abound?
May it never be! We who died to sin, how could we live in it any longer?
Or don't you know that all we who were baptized into Christ Jesus were baptized into his death?
We were buried therefore with him through baptism to death, that just like Christ was raised from the dead through the glory of the Father, so we also might walk in newness of life.
For if we have become united with him in the likeness of his death, we will also be part of his resurrection;
knowing this, that our old man was crucified with him, that the body of sin might be done away with, so that we would no longer be in bondage to sin.
For he who has died has been freed from sin.
But if we died with Christ, we believe that we will also live with him;
knowing that Christ, being raised from the dead, dies no more. Death no more has dominion over him!
For the death that he died, he died to sin one time; but the life that he lives, he lives to God.
Thus consider yourselves also to be dead to sin, but alive to God in Christ Jesus our Lord.
Therefore don't let sin reign in your mortal body, that you should obey it in its lusts.
Neither present your members to sin as instruments of unrighteousness, but present yourselves to God, as alive from the dead, and your members as instruments of righteousness to God.
For sin will not have dominion over you. For you are not under law, but under grace.
What then? Shall we sin, because we are not under law, but under grace? May it never be!
Don't you know that to whom you present yourselves as servants to obedience, his servants you are whom you obey; whether of sin to death, or of obedience to righteousness?
But thanks be to God, that, whereas you were bondservants of sin, you became obedient from the heart to that form of teaching whereunto you were delivered.
Being made free from sin, you became bondservants of righteousness.
I speak in human terms because of the weakness of your flesh, for as you presented your members as servants to uncleanness and to wickedness upon wickedness, even so now present your members as servants to righteousness for sanctification.
For when you were servants of sin, you were free in regard to righteousness.
What fruit then did you have at that time in the things of which you are now ashamed? For the end of those things is death.
But now, being made free from sin, and having become servants of God, you have your fruit of sanctification, and the result of eternal life.
For the wages of sin is death, but the free gift of God is eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord.
When it was determined that we should sail for Italy, they delivered Paul and certain other prisoners to a centurion named Julius, of the Augustan band.
Embarking in a ship of Adramyttium, which was about to sail to places on the coast of Asia, we put to sea; Aristarchus, a Macedonian of Thessalonica, being with us.
The next day, we touched at Sidon. Julius treated Paul kindly, and gave him permission to go to his friends and refresh himself.
Putting to sea from there, we sailed under the lee of Cyprus, because the winds were contrary.
When we had sailed across the sea which is off Cilicia and Pamphylia, we came to Myra, a city of Lycia.
There the centurion found a ship of Alexandria sailing for Italy, and he put us on board.
When we had sailed slowly many days, and had come with difficulty opposite Cnidus, the wind not allowing us further, we sailed under the lee of Crete, opposite Salmone.
With difficulty sailing along it we came to a certain place called Fair Havens, near the city of Lasea.
When much time had passed and the voyage was now dangerous, because the Fast had now already gone by, Paul admonished them,
and said to them, 'Sirs, I perceive that the voyage will be with injury and much loss, not only of the cargo and the ship, but also of our lives.'
But the centurion gave more heed to the master and to the owner of the ship than to those things which were spoken by Paul.
Because the haven was not suitable to winter in, the majority advised going to sea from there, if by any means they could reach Phoenix, and winter there, which is a port of Crete, looking northeast and southeast.
When the south wind blew softly, supposing that they had obtained their purpose, they weighed anchor and sailed along Crete, close to shore.
But before long, a stormy wind beat down from shore, which is called Euroclydon.
When the ship was caught, and couldn't face the wind, we gave way to it, and were driven along.
Running under the lee of a small island called Clauda, we were able, with difficulty, to secure the boat.
After they had hoisted it up, they used cables to help reinforce the ship. Fearing that they would run aground on the Syrtis sand bars, they lowered the sea anchor, and so were driven along.
As we labored exceedingly with the storm, the next day they began to throw things overboard.
On the third day, they threw out the ship's tackle with their own hands.
When neither sun nor stars shone on us for many days, and no small storm pressed on us, all hope that we would be saved was now taken away.
When they had been long without food, Paul stood up in the middle of them, and said, 'Sirs, you should have listened to me, and not have set sail from Crete, and have gotten this injury and loss.
Now I exhort you to cheer up, for there will be no loss of life among you, but only of the ship.
For there stood by me this night an angel, belonging to the God whose I am and whom I serve,
saying, 'Don't be afraid, Paul. You must stand before Caesar. Behold, God has granted you all those who sail with you.'
Therefore, sirs, cheer up! For I believe God, that it will be just as it has been spoken to me.
But we must run aground on a certain island.'
But when the fourteenth night had come, as we were driven back and forth in the Adriatic Sea, about midnight the sailors surmised that they were drawing near to some land.
They took soundings, and found twenty fathoms.
Fearing that we would run aground on rocky ground, they let go four anchors from the stern, and wished for daylight.
As the sailors were trying to flee out of the ship, and had lowered the boat into the sea, pretending that they would lay out anchors from the bow,
Paul said to the centurion and to the soldiers, 'Unless these stay in the ship, you can't be saved.'
Then the soldiers cut away the ropes of the boat, and let it fall off.
While the day was coming on, Paul begged them all to take some food, saying, 'This day is the fourteenth day that you wait and continue fasting, having taken nothing.
Therefore I beg you to take some food, for this is for your safety; for not a hair will perish from any of your heads.'
When he had said this, and had taken bread, he gave thanks to God in the presence of all, and he broke it, and began to eat.
Then they all cheered up, and they also took food.
In all, we were two hundred seventy-six souls on the ship.
When they had eaten enough, they lightened the ship, throwing out the wheat into the sea.
When it was day, they didn't recognize the land, but they noticed a certain bay with a beach, and they decided to try to drive the ship onto it.
Casting off the anchors, they left them in the sea, at the same time untying the rudder ropes. Hoisting up the foresail to the wind, they made for the beach.
But coming to a place where two seas met, they ran the vessel aground. The bow struck and remained immovable, but the stern began to break up by the violence of the waves.
The soldiers' counsel was to kill the prisoners, so that none of them would swim out and escape.
But the centurion, desiring to save Paul, stopped them from their purpose, and commanded that those who could swim should throw themselves overboard first to go toward the land;
and the rest should follow, some on planks, and some on other things from the ship. So it happened that they all escaped safely to the land.
At that time, Jesus went on the Sabbath day through the grain fields. His disciples were hungry and began to pluck heads of grain and to eat.
But the Pharisees, when they saw it, said to him, 'Behold, your disciples do what is not lawful to do on the Sabbath.'
But he said to them, 'Haven't you read what David did, when he was hungry, and those who were with him;
how he entered into the house of God, and ate the show bread, which was not lawful for him to eat, neither for those who were with him, but only for the priests?
Or have you not read in the law, that on the Sabbath day, the priests in the temple profane the Sabbath, and are guiltless?
But I tell you that one greater than the temple is here.
But if you had known what this means, 'I desire mercy, and not sacrifice,' you would not have condemned the guiltless.
For the Son of Man is Lord of the Sabbath.'
He departed there, and went into their synagogue.
And behold there was a man with a withered hand. They asked him, 'Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath day?' that they might accuse him.
He said to them, 'What man is there among you, who has one sheep, and if this one falls into a pit on the Sabbath day, won't he grab on to it, and lift it out?
Of how much more value then is a man than a sheep! Therefore it is lawful to do good on the Sabbath day.'
Then he told the man, 'Stretch out your hand.' He stretched it out; and it was restored whole, just like the other.
But the Pharisees went out, and conspired against him, how they might destroy him.
Jesus, perceiving that, withdrew from there. Great multitudes followed him; and he healed them all,
and commanded them that they should not make him known:
that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through Isaiah the prophet, saying,
'Behold, my servant whom I have chosen; my beloved in whom my soul is well pleased: I will put my Spirit on him. He will proclaim justice to the nations.
He will not strive, nor shout; neither will anyone hear his voice in the streets.
He won't break a bruised reed. He won't quench a smoking flax, until he leads justice to victory.
In his name, the nations will hope.'
Then one possessed by a demon, blind and mute, was brought to him and he healed him, so that the blind and mute man both spoke and saw.
All the multitudes were amazed, and said, 'Can this be the son of David?'
But when the Pharisees heard it, they said, 'This man does not cast out demons, except by Beelzebul, the prince of the demons.'
Knowing their thoughts, Jesus said to them, 'Every kingdom divided against itself is brought to desolation, and every city or house divided against itself will not stand.
If Satan casts out Satan, he is divided against himself. How then will his kingdom stand?
If I by Beelzebul cast out demons, by whom do your children cast them out? Therefore they will be your judges.
But if I by the Spirit of God cast out demons, then the Kingdom of God has come upon you.
Or how can one enter into the house of the strong man, and plunder his goods, unless he first bind the strong man? Then he will plunder his house.
'He who is not with me is against me, and he who doesn't gather with me, scatters.
Therefore I tell you, every sin and blasphemy will be forgiven men, but the blasphemy against the Spirit will not be forgiven men.
Whoever speaks a word against the Son of Man, it will be forgiven him; but whoever speaks against the Holy Spirit, it will not be forgiven him, neither in this age, nor in that which is to come.
'Either make the tree good, and its fruit good, or make the tree corrupt, and its fruit corrupt; for the tree is known by its fruit.
You offspring of vipers, how can you, being evil, speak good things? For out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks.
The good man out of his good treasure brings out good things, and the evil man out of his evil treasure brings out evil things.
I tell you that every idle word that men speak, they will give account of it in the day of judgment.
For by your words you will be justified, and by your words you will be condemned.'
Then certain of the scribes and Pharisees answered, 'Teacher, we want to see a sign from you.'
But he answered them, 'An evil and adulterous generation seeks after a sign, but no sign will be given it but the sign of Jonah the prophet.
For as Jonah was three days and three nights in the belly of the whale, so will the Son of Man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth.
The men of Nineveh will stand up in the judgment with this generation, and will condemn it, for they repented at the preaching of Jonah; and behold, someone greater than Jonah is here.
The queen of the south will rise up in the judgment with this generation, and will condemn it, for she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon; and behold, someone greater than Solomon is here.
But the unclean spirit, when he is gone out of the man, passes through waterless places, seeking rest, and doesn't find it.
Then he says, 'I will return into my house from which I came out,' and when he has come back, he finds it empty, swept, and put in order.
Then he goes, and takes with himself seven other spirits more evil than he is, and they enter in and dwell there. The last state of that man becomes worse than the first. Even so will it be also to this evil generation.'
While he was yet speaking to the multitudes, behold, his mother and his brothers stood outside, seeking to speak to him.
One said to him, 'Behold, your mother and your brothers stand outside, seeking to speak to you.'
But he answered him who spoke to him, 'Who is my mother? Who are my brothers?'
He stretched out his hand towards his disciples, and said, 'Behold, my mother and my brothers!
For whoever does the will of my Father who is in heaven, he is my brother, and sister, and mother.'
Brothers, my heart's desire and my prayer to God is for Israel, that they may be saved.
For I testify about them that they have a zeal for God, but not according to knowledge.
For being ignorant of God's righteousness, and seeking to establish their own righteousness, they didn't subject themselves to the righteousness of God.
For Christ is the fulfillment of the law for righteousness to everyone who believes.
For Moses writes about the righteousness of the law, 'The one who does them will live by them.'
But the righteousness which is of faith says this, 'Don't say in your heart, 'Who will ascend into heaven?' (that is, to bring Christ down);
or, 'Who will descend into the abyss?' (that is, to bring Christ up from the dead.)'
But what does it say? 'The word is near you, in your mouth, and in your heart;' that is, the word of faith, which we preach:
that if you will confess with your mouth that Jesus is Lord, and believe in your heart that God raised him from the dead, you will be saved.
For with the heart, one believes unto righteousness; and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation.
For the Scripture says, 'Whoever believes in him will not be disappointed.'
For there is no distinction between Jew and Greek; for the same Lord is Lord of all, and is rich to all who call on him.
For, 'Whoever will call on the name of the Lord will be saved.'
How then will they call on him in whom they have not believed? How will they believe in him whom they have not heard? How will they hear without a preacher?
And how will they preach unless they are sent? As it is written: 'How beautiful are the feet of those who preach the Good News of peace, who bring glad tidings of good things!'
But they didn't all listen to the glad news. For Isaiah says, 'Lord, who has believed our report?'
So faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God.
But I say, didn't they hear? Yes, most certainly, 'Their sound went out into all the earth, their words to the ends of the world.'
But I ask, didn't Israel know? First Moses says, 'I will provoke you to jealousy with that which is no nation, with a nation void of understanding I will make you angry.'
Isaiah is very bold, and says, 'I was found by those who didn't seek me. I was revealed to those who didn't ask for me.'
But as to Israel he says, 'All day long I stretched out my hands to a disobedient and contrary people.'
Now in the things which we are saying, the main point is this. We have such a high priest, who sat down on the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens,
a servant of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord pitched, not man.
For every high priest is appointed to offer both gifts and sacrifices. Therefore it is necessary that this high priest also have something to offer.
For if he were on earth, he would not be a priest at all, seeing there are priests who offer the gifts according to the law;
who serve a copy and shadow of the heavenly things, even as Moses was warned by God when he was about to make the tabernacle, for he said, 'See, you shall make everything according to the pattern that was shown to you on the mountain.'
But now he has obtained a more excellent ministry, by so much as he is also the mediator of a better covenant, which on better promises has been given as law.
For if that first covenant had been faultless, then no place would have been sought for a second.
For finding fault with them, he said, 'Behold, the days come,' says the Lord, 'that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel and with the house of Judah;
not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers, in the day that I took them by the hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt; for they didn't continue in my covenant, and I disregarded them,' says the Lord.
'For this is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel. After those days,' says the Lord; 'I will put my laws into their mind, I will also write them on their heart. I will be their God, and they will be my people.
They will not teach every man his fellow citizen, and every man his brother, saying, 'Know the Lord,' for all will know me, from the least of them to the greatest of them.
For I will be merciful to their unrighteousness. I will remember their sins and lawless deeds no more.'
In that he says, 'A new covenant,' he has made the first old. But that which is becoming old and grows aged is near to vanishing away.
After these things I looked and saw a door opened in heaven, and the first voice that I heard, like a trumpet speaking with me, was one saying, 'Come up here, and I will show you the things which must happen after this.'
Immediately I was in the Spirit. Behold, there was a throne set in heaven, and one sitting on the throne
that looked like a jasper stone and a sardius. There was a rainbow around the throne, like an emerald to look at.
Around the throne were twenty-four thrones. On the thrones were twenty-four elders sitting, dressed in white garments, with crowns of gold on their heads.
Out of the throne proceed lightnings, sounds, and thunders. There were seven lamps of fire burning before his throne, which are the seven Spirits of God.
Before the throne was something like a sea of glass, similar to crystal. In the midst of the throne, and around the throne were four living creatures full of eyes before and behind.
The first creature was like a lion, and the second creature like a calf, and the third creature had a face like a man, and the fourth was like a flying eagle.
The four living creatures, each one of them having six wings, are full of eyes around and within. They have no rest day and night, saying, 'Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God, the Almighty, who was and who is and who is to come!'
When the living creatures give glory, honor, and thanks to him who sits on the throne, to him who lives forever and ever,
the twenty-four elders fall down before him who sits on the throne, and worship him who lives forever and ever, and throw their crowns before the throne, saying,
'Worthy are you, our Lord and God, the Holy One, to receive the glory, the honor, and the power, for you created all things, and because of your desire they existed, and were created!'
Whoever believes that Jesus is the Christ is born of God. Whoever loves the father also loves the child who is born of him.
By this we know that we love the children of God, when we love God and keep his commandments.
For this is the love of God, that we keep his commandments. His commandments are not grievous.
For whatever is born of God overcomes the world. This is the victory that has overcome the world: your faith.
Who is he who overcomes the world, but he who believes that Jesus is the Son of God?
This is he who came by water and blood, Jesus Christ; not with the water only, but with the water and the blood. It is the Spirit who testifies, because the Spirit is the truth.
For there are three who testify:
the Spirit, the water, and the blood; and the three agree as one.
If we receive the witness of men, the witness of God is greater; for this is God's testimony which he has testified concerning his Son.
He who believes in the Son of God has the testimony in himself. He who doesn't believe God has made him a liar, because he has not believed in the testimony that God has given concerning his Son.
The testimony is this, that God gave to us eternal life, and this life is in his Son.
He who has the Son has the life. He who doesn't have God's Son doesn't have the life.
These things I have written to you who believe in the name of the Son of God, that you may know that you have eternal life, and that you may continue to believe in the name of the Son of God.
This is the boldness which we have toward him, that, if we ask anything according to his will, he listens to us.
And if we know that he listens to us, whatever we ask, we know that we have the petitions which we have asked of him.
If anyone sees his brother sinning a sin not leading to death, he shall ask, and God will give him life for those who sin not leading to death. There is a sin leading to death. I don't say that he should make a request concerning this.
All unrighteousness is sin, and there is a sin not leading to death.
We know that whoever is born of God doesn't sin, but he who was born of God keeps himself, and the evil one doesn't touch him.
We know that we are of God, and the whole world lies in the power of the evil one.
We know that the Son of God has come, and has given us an understanding, that we know him who is true, and we are in him who is true, in his Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God, and eternal life.
Little children, keep yourselves from idols.
Be therefore imitators of God, as beloved children.
Walk in love, even as Christ also loved you, and gave himself up for us, an offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweet-smelling fragrance.
But sexual immorality, and all uncleanness, or covetousness, let it not even be mentioned among you, as becomes saints;
nor filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor jesting, which are not appropriate; but rather giving of thanks.
Know this for sure, that no sexually immoral person, nor unclean person, nor covetous man, who is an idolater, has any inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ and God.
Let no one deceive you with empty words. For because of these things, the wrath of God comes on the children of disobedience.
Therefore don't be partakers with them.
For you were once darkness, but are now light in the Lord. Walk as children of light,
for the fruit of the Spirit is in all goodness and righteousness and truth,
proving what is well pleasing to the Lord.
Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather even reprove them.
For the things which are done by them in secret, it is a shame even to speak of.
But all things, when they are reproved, are revealed by the light, for everything that reveals is light.
Therefore he says, 'Awake, you who sleep, and arise from the dead, and Christ will shine on you.'
Therefore watch carefully how you walk, not as unwise, but as wise;
redeeming the time, because the days are evil.
Therefore don't be foolish, but understand what the will of the Lord is.
Don't be drunken with wine, in which is dissipation, but be filled with the Spirit,
speaking to one another in psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs; singing, and singing praises in your heart to the Lord;
giving thanks always concerning all things in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to God, even the Father;
subjecting yourselves one to another in the fear of Christ.
Wives, be subject to your own husbands, as to the Lord.
For the husband is the head of the wife, and Christ also is the head of the assembly, being himself the savior of the body.
But as the assembly is subject to Christ, so let the wives also be to their own husbands in everything.
Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ also loved the assembly, and gave himself up for it;
that he might sanctify it, having cleansed it by the washing of water with the word,
that he might present the assembly to himself gloriously, not having spot or wrinkle or any such thing; but that it should be holy and without blemish.
Even so husbands also ought to love their own wives as their own bodies. He who loves his own wife loves himself.
For no man ever hated his own flesh; but nourishes and cherishes it, even as the Lord also does the assembly;
because we are members of his body, of his flesh and bones.
'For this cause a man will leave his father and mother, and will be joined to his wife. The two will become one flesh.'
This mystery is great, but I speak concerning Christ and of the assembly.
Nevertheless each of you must also love his own wife even as himself; and let the wife see that she respects her husband.
Now on the first day of the week, Mary Magdalene went early, while it was still dark, to the tomb, and saw the stone taken away from the tomb.
Therefore she ran and came to Simon Peter, and to the other disciple whom Jesus loved, and said to them, 'They have taken away the Lord out of the tomb, and we don't know where they have laid him!'
Therefore Peter and the other disciple went out, and they went toward the tomb.
They both ran together. The other disciple outran Peter, and came to the tomb first.
Stooping and looking in, he saw the linen cloths lying, yet he didn't enter in.
Then Simon Peter came, following him, and entered into the tomb. He saw the linen cloths lying,
and the cloth that had been on his head, not lying with the linen cloths, but rolled up in a place by itself.
So then the other disciple who came first to the tomb also entered in, and he saw and believed.
For as yet they didn't know the Scripture, that he must rise from the dead.
So the disciples went away again to their own homes.
But Mary was standing outside at the tomb weeping. So, as she wept, she stooped and looked into the tomb,
and she saw two angels in white sitting, one at the head, and one at the feet, where the body of Jesus had lain.
They told her, 'Woman, why are you weeping?' She said to them, 'Because they have taken away my Lord, and I don't know where they have laid him.'
When she had said this, she turned around and saw Jesus standing, and didn't know that it was Jesus.
Jesus said to her, 'Woman, why are you weeping? Who are you looking for?' She, supposing him to be the gardener, said to him, 'Sir, if you have carried him away, tell me where you have laid him, and I will take him away.'
Jesus said to her, 'Mary.' She turned and said to him, 'Rhabbouni!' which is to say, 'Teacher!'
Jesus said to her, 'Don't touch me, for I haven't yet ascended to my Father; but go to my brothers, and tell them, 'I am ascending to my Father and your Father, to my God and your God.''
Mary Magdalene came and told the disciples that she had seen the Lord, and that he had said these things to her.
When therefore it was evening, on that day, the first day of the week, and when the doors were locked where the disciples were assembled, for fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood in the midst, and said to them, 'Peace be to you.'
When he had said this, he showed them his hands and his side. The disciples therefore were glad when they saw the Lord.
Jesus therefore said to them again, 'Peace be to you. As the Father has sent me, even so I send you.'
When he had said this, he breathed on them, and said to them, 'Receive the Holy Spirit!
Whoever's sins you forgive, they are forgiven them. Whoever's sins you retain, they have been retained.'
But Thomas, one of the twelve, called Didymus, wasn't with them when Jesus came.
The other disciples therefore said to him, 'We have seen the Lord!' But he said to them, 'Unless I see in his hands the print of the nails, and put my hand into his side, I will not believe.'
After eight days again his disciples were inside, and Thomas was with them. Jesus came, the doors being locked, and stood in the midst, and said, 'Peace be to you.'
Then he said to Thomas, 'Reach here your finger, and see my hands. Reach here your hand, and put it into my side. Don't be unbelieving, but believing.'
Thomas answered him, 'My Lord and my God!'
Jesus said to him, 'Because you have seen me, you have believed. Blessed are those who have not seen, and have believed.'
Therefore Jesus did many other signs in the presence of his disciples, which are not written in this book;
but these are written, that you may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing you may have life in his name.
Now after the Sabbath, as it began to dawn on the first day of the week, Mary Magdalene and the other Mary came to see the tomb.
Behold, there was a great earthquake, for an angel of the Lord descended from the sky, and came and rolled away the stone from the door, and sat on it.
His appearance was like lightning, and his clothing white as snow.
For fear of him, the guards shook, and became like dead men.
The angel answered the women, 'Don't be afraid, for I know that you seek Jesus, who has been crucified.
He is not here, for he has risen, just like he said. Come, see the place where the Lord was lying.
Go quickly and tell his disciples, 'He has risen from the dead, and behold, he goes before you into Galilee; there you will see him.' Behold, I have told you.'
They departed quickly from the tomb with fear and great joy, and ran to bring his disciples word.
As they went to tell his disciples, behold, Jesus met them, saying, 'Rejoice!' They came and took hold of his feet, and worshiped him.
Then Jesus said to them, 'Don't be afraid. Go tell my brothers that they should go into Galilee, and there they will see me.'
Now while they were going, behold, some of the guards came into the city, and told the chief priests all the things that had happened.
When they were assembled with the elders, and had taken counsel, they gave a large amount of silver to the soldiers,
saying, 'Say that his disciples came by night, and stole him away while we slept.
If this comes to the governor's ears, we will persuade him and make you free of worry.'
So they took the money and did as they were told. This saying was spread abroad among the Jews, and continues until this day.
But the eleven disciples went into Galilee, to the mountain where Jesus had sent them.
When they saw him, they bowed down to him, but some doubted.
Jesus came to them and spoke to them, saying, 'All authority has been given to me in heaven and on earth.
Therefore go, and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit,
teaching them to observe all things that I commanded you. Behold, I am with you always, even to the end of the age.' Amen.
He arose from there and came into the borders of Judea and beyond the Jordan. Multitudes came together to him again. As he usually did, he was again teaching them.
Pharisees came to him testing him, and asked him, 'Is it lawful for a man to divorce his wife?'
He answered, 'What did Moses command you?'
They said, 'Moses allowed a certificate of divorce to be written, and to divorce her.'
But Jesus said to them, 'For your hardness of heart, he wrote you this commandment.
But from the beginning of the creation, God made them male and female.
For this cause a man will leave his father and mother, and will join to his wife,
and the two will become one flesh, so that they are no longer two, but one flesh.
What therefore God has joined together, let no man separate.'
In the house, his disciples asked him again about the same matter.
He said to them, 'Whoever divorces his wife, and marries another, commits adultery against her.
If a woman herself divorces her husband, and marries another, she commits adultery.'
They were bringing to him little children, that he should touch them, but the disciples rebuked those who were bringing them.
But when Jesus saw it, he was moved with indignation, and said to them, 'Allow the little children to come to me! Don't forbid them, for the Kingdom of God belongs to such as these.
Most certainly I tell you, whoever will not receive the Kingdom of God like a little child, he will in no way enter into it.'
He took them in his arms, and blessed them, laying his hands on them.
As he was going out into the way, one ran to him, knelt before him, and asked him, 'Good Teacher, what shall I do that I may inherit eternal life?'
Jesus said to him, 'Why do you call me good? No one is good except one--God.
You know the commandments: 'Do not murder,' 'Do not commit adultery,' 'Do not steal,' 'Do not give false testimony,' 'Do not defraud,' 'Honor your father and mother.''
He said to him, 'Teacher, I have observed all these things from my youth.'
Jesus looking at him loved him, and said to him, 'One thing you lack. Go, sell whatever you have, and give to the poor, and you will have treasure in heaven; and come, follow me, taking up the cross.'
But his face fell at that saying, and he went away sorrowful, for he was one who had great possessions.
Jesus looked around, and said to his disciples, 'How difficult it is for those who have riches to enter into the Kingdom of God!'
The disciples were amazed at his words. But Jesus answered again, 'Children, how hard is it for those who trust in riches to enter into the Kingdom of God!
It is easier for a camel to go through a needle's eye than for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of God.'
They were exceedingly astonished, saying to him, 'Then who can be saved?'
Jesus, looking at them, said, 'With men it is impossible, but not with God, for all things are possible with God.'
Peter began to tell him, 'Behold, we have left all, and have followed you.'
Jesus said, 'Most certainly I tell you, there is no one who has left house, or brothers, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or land, for my sake, and for the sake of the Good News,
but he will receive one hundred times more now in this time, houses, brothers, sisters, mothers, children, and land, with persecutions; and in the age to come eternal life.
But many who are first will be last; and the last first.'
They were on the way, going up to Jerusalem; and Jesus was going in front of them, and they were amazed; and those who followed were afraid. He again took the twelve, and began to tell them the things that were going to happen to him.
Behold, we are going up to Jerusalem. The Son of Man will be delivered to the chief priests and the scribes. They will condemn him to death, and will deliver him to the Gentiles.
They will mock him, spit on him, scourge him, and kill him. On the third day he will rise again.'
James and John, the sons of Zebedee, came near to him, saying, 'Teacher, we want you to do for us whatever we will ask.'
He said to them, 'What do you want me to do for you?'
They said to him, 'Grant to us that we may sit, one at your right hand, and one at your left hand, in your glory.'
But Jesus said to them, 'You don't know what you are asking. Are you able to drink the cup that I drink, and to be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?'
They said to him, 'We are able.' Jesus said to them, 'You shall indeed drink the cup that I drink, and you shall be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with;
but to sit at my right hand and at my left hand is not mine to give, but for whom it has been prepared.'
When the ten heard it, they began to be indignant towards James and John.
Jesus summoned them, and said to them, 'You know that they who are recognized as rulers over the nations lord it over them, and their great ones exercise authority over them.
But it shall not be so among you, but whoever wants to become great among you shall be your servant.
Whoever of you wants to become first among you, shall be bondservant of all.
For the Son of Man also came not to be served, but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many.'
They came to Jericho. As he went out from Jericho, with his disciples and a great multitude, the son of Timaeus, Bartimaeus, a blind beggar, was sitting by the road.
When he heard that it was Jesus the Nazarene, he began to cry out, and say, 'Jesus, you son of David, have mercy on me!'
Many rebuked him, that he should be quiet, but he cried out much more, 'You son of David, have mercy on me!'
Jesus stood still, and said, 'Call him.' They called the blind man, saying to him, 'Cheer up! Get up. He is calling you!'
He, casting away his cloak, sprang up, and came to Jesus.
Jesus asked him, 'What do you want me to do for you?' The blind man said to him, 'Rhabboni, that I may see again.'
Jesus said to him, 'Go your way. Your faith has made you well.' Immediately he received his sight, and followed Jesus in the way.
Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus through the will of God, and Timothy our brother, to the assembly of God which is at Corinth, with all the saints who are in the whole of Achaia:
Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies and God of all comfort;
who comforts us in all our affliction, that we may be able to comfort those who are in any affliction, through the comfort with which we ourselves are comforted by God.
For as the sufferings of Christ abound to us, even so our comfort also abounds through Christ.
But if we are afflicted, it is for your comfort and salvation. If we are comforted, it is for your comfort, which produces in you the patient enduring of the same sufferings which we also suffer.
Our hope for you is steadfast, knowing that, since you are partakers of the sufferings, so also are you of the comfort.
For we don't desire to have you uninformed, brothers, concerning our affliction which happened to us in Asia, that we were weighed down exceedingly, beyond our power, so much that we despaired even of life.
Yes, we ourselves have had the sentence of death within ourselves, that we should not trust in ourselves, but in God who raises the dead,
who delivered us out of so great a death, and does deliver; on whom we have set our hope that he will also still deliver us;
you also helping together on our behalf by your supplication; that, for the gift bestowed on us by means of many, thanks may be given by many persons on your behalf.
For our boasting is this: the testimony of our conscience, that in holiness and sincerity of God, not in fleshly wisdom but in the grace of God we behaved ourselves in the world, and more abundantly toward you.
For we write no other things to you, than what you read or even acknowledge, and I hope you will acknowledge to the end;
as also you acknowledged us in part, that we are your boasting, even as you also are ours, in the day of our Lord Jesus.
In this confidence, I was determined to come first to you, that you might have a second benefit;
and by you to pass into Macedonia, and again from Macedonia to come to you, and to be sent forward by you on my journey to Judea.
When I therefore was thus determined, did I show fickleness? Or the things that I purpose, do I purpose according to the flesh, that with me there should be the 'Yes, yes' and the 'No, no?'
But as God is faithful, our word toward you was not 'Yes and no.'
For the Son of God, Jesus Christ, who was preached among you by us, by me, Silvanus, and Timothy, was not 'Yes and no,' but in him is 'Yes.'
For however many are the promises of God, in him is the 'Yes.' Therefore also through him is the 'Amen,' to the glory of God through us.
Now he who establishes us with you in Christ, and anointed us, is God;
who also sealed us, and gave us the down payment of the Spirit in our hearts.
But I call God for a witness to my soul, that I didn't come to Corinth to spare you.
Not that we have lordship over your faith, but are fellow workers with you for your joy. For you stand firm in faith.
Therefore let us also, seeing we are surrounded by so great a cloud of witnesses, lay aside every weight and the sin which so easily entangles us, and let us run with patience the race that is set before us,
looking to Jesus, the author and perfecter of faith, who for the joy that was set before him endured the cross, despising its shame, and has sat down at the right hand of the throne of God.
For consider him who has endured such contradiction of sinners against himself, that you don't grow weary, fainting in your souls.
You have not yet resisted to blood, striving against sin;
and you have forgotten the exhortation which reasons with you as with children, 'My son, don't take lightly the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when you are reproved by him;
For whom the Lord loves, he chastens, and scourges every son whom he receives.'
It is for discipline that you endure. God deals with you as with children, for what son is there whom his father doesn't discipline?
But if you are without discipline, of which all have been made partakers, then are you illegitimate, and not children.
Furthermore, we had the fathers of our flesh to chasten us, and we paid them respect. Shall we not much rather be in subjection to the Father of spirits, and live?
For they indeed, for a few days, punished us as seemed good to them; but he for our profit, that we may be partakers of his holiness.
All chastening seems for the present to be not joyous but grievous; yet afterward it yields the peaceful fruit of righteousness to those who have been exercised thereby.
Therefore, lift up the hands that hang down and the feeble knees,
and make straight paths for your feet, so that which is lame may not be dislocated, but rather be healed.
Follow after peace with all men, and the sanctification without which no man will see the Lord,
looking carefully lest there be any man who falls short of the grace of God; lest any root of bitterness springing up trouble you, and many be defiled by it;
lest there be any sexually immoral person, or profane person, like Esau, who sold his birthright for one meal.
For you know that even when he afterward desired to inherit the blessing, he was rejected, for he found no place for a change of mind though he sought it diligently with tears.
For you have not come to a mountain that might be touched, and that burned with fire, and to blackness, darkness, storm,
the sound of a trumpet, and the voice of words; which those who heard it begged that not one more word should be spoken to them,
for they could not stand that which was commanded, 'If even an animal touches the mountain, it shall be stoned
and so fearful was the appearance, that Moses said, 'I am terrified and trembling.'
But you have come to Mount Zion, and to the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to innumerable multitudes of angels,
to the general assembly and assembly of the firstborn who are enrolled in heaven, to God the Judge of all, to the spirits of just men made perfect,
to Jesus, the mediator of a new covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling that speaks better than that of Abel.
See that you don't refuse him who speaks. For if they didn't escape when they refused him who warned on the Earth, how much more will we not escape who turn away from him who warns from heaven,
whose voice shook the earth then, but now he has promised, saying, 'Yet once more I will shake not only the earth, but also the heavens.'
This phrase, 'Yet once more,' signifies the removing of those things that are shaken, as of things that have been made, that those things which are not shaken may remain.
Therefore, receiving a Kingdom that can't be shaken, let us have grace, through which we serve God acceptably, with reverence and awe,
for our God is a consuming fire.
When he came down from the mountain, great multitudes followed him.
Behold, a leper came to him and worshiped him, saying, 'Lord, if you want to, you can make me clean.'
Jesus stretched out his hand, and touched him, saying, 'I want to. Be made clean.' Immediately his leprosy was cleansed.
Jesus said to him, 'See that you tell nobody, but go, show yourself to the priest, and offer the gift that Moses commanded, as a testimony to them.'
When he came into Capernaum, a centurion came to him, asking him,
and saying, 'Lord, my servant lies in the house paralyzed, grievously tormented.'
Jesus said to him, 'I will come and heal him.'
The centurion answered, 'Lord, I'm not worthy for you to come under my roof. Just say the word, and my servant will be healed.
For I am also a man under authority, having under myself soldiers. I tell this one, 'Go,' and he goes; and tell another, 'Come,' and he comes; and tell my servant, 'Do this,' and he does it.'
When Jesus heard it, he marveled, and said to those who followed, 'Most certainly I tell you, I haven't found so great a faith, not even in Israel.
I tell you that many will come from the east and the west, and will sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven,
but the children of the Kingdom will be thrown out into the outer darkness. There will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.'
Jesus said to the centurion, 'Go your way. Let it be done for you as you have believed.' His servant was healed in that hour.
When Jesus came into Peter's house, he saw his wife's mother lying sick with a fever.
He touched her hand, and the fever left her. She got up and served him.
When evening came, they brought to him many possessed with demons. He cast out the spirits with a word, and healed all who were sick;
that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through Isaiah the prophet, saying: 'He took our infirmities, and bore our diseases.'
Now when Jesus saw great multitudes around him, he gave the order to depart to the other side.
A scribe came, and said to him, 'Teacher, I will follow you wherever you go.'
Jesus said to him, 'The foxes have holes, and the birds of the sky have nests, but the Son of Man has nowhere to lay his head.'
Another of his disciples said to him, 'Lord, allow me first to go and bury my father.'
But Jesus said to him, 'Follow me, and leave the dead to bury their own dead.'
When he got into a boat, his disciples followed him.
Behold, a violent storm came up on the sea, so much that the boat was covered with the waves, but he was asleep.
They came to him, and woke him up, saying, 'Save us, Lord! We are dying!'
He said to them, 'Why are you fearful, O you of little faith?' Then he got up, rebuked the wind and the sea, and there was a great calm.
The men marveled, saying, 'What kind of man is this, that even the wind and the sea obey him?'
When he came to the other side, into the country of the Gergesenes, two people possessed by demons met him there, coming out of the tombs, exceedingly fierce, so that nobody could pass that way.
Behold, they cried out, saying, 'What do we have to do with you, Jesus, Son of God? Have you come here to torment us before the time?'
Now there was a herd of many pigs feeding far away from them.
The demons begged him, saying, 'If you cast us out, permit us to go away into the herd of pigs.'
He said to them, 'Go!' They came out, and went into the herd of pigs: and behold, the whole herd of pigs rushed down the cliff into the sea, and died in the water.
Those who fed them fled, and went away into the city, and told everything, including what happened to those who were possessed with demons.
Behold, all the city came out to meet Jesus. When they saw him, they begged that he would depart from their borders.
I exhort therefore, first of all, that petitions, prayers, intercessions, and givings of thanks, be made for all men:
for kings and all who are in high places; that we may lead a tranquil and quiet life in all godliness and reverence.
For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior;
who desires all people to be saved and come to full knowledge of the truth.
For there is one God, and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus,
who gave himself as a ransom for all; the testimony in its own times;
to which I was appointed a preacher and an apostle (I am telling the truth in Christ, not lying), a teacher of the Gentiles in faith and truth.
I desire therefore that the men in every place pray, lifting up holy hands without anger and doubting.
In the same way, that women also adorn themselves in decent clothing, with modesty and propriety; not just with braided hair, gold, pearls, or expensive clothing;
but (which becomes women professing godliness) with good works.
Let a woman learn in quietness with all subjection.
But I don't permit a woman to teach, nor to exercise authority over a man, but to be in quietness.
For Adam was first formed, then Eve.
Adam wasn't deceived, but the woman, being deceived, has fallen into disobedience;
but she will be saved through her childbearing, if they continue in faith, love, and sanctification with sobriety.
Foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you not to obey the truth, before whose eyes Jesus Christ was openly set forth among you as crucified?
I just want to learn this from you. Did you receive the Spirit by the works of the law, or by hearing of faith?
Are you so foolish? Having begun in the Spirit, are you now completed in the flesh?
Did you suffer so many things in vain, if it is indeed in vain?
He therefore who supplies the Spirit to you, and works miracles among you, does he do it by the works of the law, or by hearing of faith?
Even as Abraham 'believed God, and it was counted to him for righteousness.'
Know therefore that those who are of faith, the same are children of Abraham.
The Scripture, foreseeing that God would justify the Gentiles by faith, preached the Good News beforehand to Abraham, saying, 'In you all the nations will be blessed.'
So then, those who are of faith are blessed with the faithful Abraham.
For as many as are of the works of the law are under a curse. For it is written, 'Cursed is everyone who doesn't continue in all things that are written in the book of the law, to do them.'
Now that no man is justified by the law before God is evident, for, 'The righteous will live by faith.'
The law is not of faith, but, 'The man who does them will live by them.'
Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law, having become a curse for us. For it is written, 'Cursed is everyone who hangs on a tree,'
that the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through Christ Jesus; that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through faith.
Brothers, speaking of human terms, though it is only a man's covenant, yet when it has been confirmed, no one makes it void, or adds to it.
Now the promises were spoken to Abraham and to his seed. He doesn't say, 'To seeds,' as of many, but as of one, 'To your seed,' which is Christ.
Now I say this. A covenant confirmed beforehand by God in Christ, the law, which came four hundred thirty years after, does not annul, so as to make the promise of no effect.
For if the inheritance is of the law, it is no more of promise; but God has granted it to Abraham by promise.
What then is the law? It was added because of transgressions, until the seed should come to whom the promise has been made. It was ordained through angels by the hand of a mediator.
Now a mediator is not between one, but God is one.
Is the law then against the promises of God? Certainly not! For if there had been a law given which could make alive, most certainly righteousness would have been of the law.
But the Scriptures imprisoned all things under sin, that the promise by faith in Jesus Christ might be given to those who believe.
But before faith came, we were kept in custody under the law, confined for the faith which should afterwards be revealed.
So that the law has become our tutor to bring us to Christ, that we might be justified by faith.
But now that faith has come, we are no longer under a tutor.
For you are all children of God, through faith in Christ Jesus.
For as many of you as were baptized into Christ have put on Christ.
There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither slave nor free man, there is neither male nor female; for you are all one in Christ Jesus.
If you are Christ's, then you are Abraham's seed and heirs according to promise.
Now it happened, while the multitude pressed on him and heard the word of God, that he was standing by the lake of Gennesaret.
He saw two boats standing by the lake, but the fishermen had gone out of them, and were washing their nets.
He entered into one of the boats, which was Simon's, and asked him to put out a little from the land. He sat down and taught the multitudes from the boat.
When he had finished speaking, he said to Simon, 'Put out into the deep, and let down your nets for a catch.'
Simon answered him, 'Master, we worked all night, and took nothing; but at your word I will let down the net.'
When they had done this, they caught a great multitude of fish, and their net was breaking.
They beckoned to their partners in the other boat, that they should come and help them. They came, and filled both boats, so that they began to sink.
But Simon Peter, when he saw it, fell down at Jesus' knees, saying, 'Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, Lord.'
For he was amazed, and all who were with him, at the catch of fish which they had caught;
and so also were James and John, sons of Zebedee, who were partners with Simon. Jesus said to Simon, 'Don't be afraid. From now on you will be catching people alive.'
When they had brought their boats to land, they left everything, and followed him.
It happened, while he was in one of the cities, behold, there was a man full of leprosy. When he saw Jesus, he fell on his face, and begged him, saying, 'Lord, if you want to, you can make me clean.'
He stretched out his hand, and touched him, saying, 'I want to. Be made clean.' Immediately the leprosy left him.
He commanded him to tell no one, 'But go your way, and show yourself to the priest, and offer for your cleansing according to what Moses commanded, for a testimony to them.'
But the report concerning him spread much more, and great multitudes came together to hear, and to be healed by him of their infirmities.
But he withdrew himself into the desert, and prayed.
It happened on one of those days, that he was teaching; and there were Pharisees and teachers of the law sitting by, who had come out of every village of Galilee, Judea, and Jerusalem. The power of the Lord was with him to heal them.
Behold, men brought a paralyzed man on a cot, and they sought to bring him in to lay before Jesus.
Not finding a way to bring him in because of the multitude, they went up to the housetop, and let him down through the tiles with his cot into the midst before Jesus.
Seeing their faith, he said to him, 'Man, your sins are forgiven you.'
The scribes and the Pharisees began to reason, saying, 'Who is this that speaks blasphemies? Who can forgive sins, but God alone?'
But Jesus, perceiving their thoughts, answered them, 'Why are you reasoning so in your hearts?
Which is easier to say, 'Your sins are forgiven you;' or to say, 'Arise and walk?'
But that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins' (he said to the paralyzed man), 'I tell you, arise, and take up your cot, and go to your house.'
Immediately he rose up before them, and took up that which he was laying on, and departed to his house, glorifying God.
Amazement took hold on all, and they glorified God. They were filled with fear, saying, 'We have seen strange things today.'
After these things he went out, and saw a tax collector named Levi sitting at the tax office, and said to him, 'Follow me!'
He left everything, and rose up and followed him.
Levi made a great feast for him in his house. There was a great crowd of tax collectors and others who were reclining with them.
Their scribes and the Pharisees murmured against his disciples, saying, 'Why do you eat and drink with the tax collectors and sinners?'
Jesus answered them, 'Those who are healthy have no need for a physician, but those who are sick do.
I have not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.'
They said to him, 'Why do John's disciples often fast and pray, likewise also the disciples of the Pharisees, but yours eat and drink?'
He said to them, 'Can you make the friends of the bridegroom fast, while the bridegroom is with them?
But the days will come when the bridegroom will be taken away from them. Then they will fast in those days.'
He also told a parable to them. 'No one puts a piece from a new garment on an old garment, or else he will tear the new, and also the piece from the new will not match the old.
No one puts new wine into old wineskins, or else the new wine will burst the skins, and it will be spilled, and the skins will be destroyed.
But new wine must be put into fresh wineskins, and both are preserved.
No man having drunk old wine immediately desires new, for he says, 'The old is better.''
'These things have I spoken to you, so that you wouldn't be caused to stumble.
They will put you out of the synagogues. Yes, the time comes that whoever kills you will think that he offers service to God.
They will do these things because they have not known the Father, nor me.
But I have told you these things, so that when the time comes, you may remember that I told you about them. I didn't tell you these things from the beginning, because I was with you.
But now I am going to him who sent me, and none of you asks me, 'Where are you going?'
But because I have told you these things, sorrow has filled your heart.
Nevertheless I tell you the truth: It is to your advantage that I go away, for if I don't go away, the Counselor won't come to you. But if I go, I will send him to you.
When he has come, he will convict the world about sin, about righteousness, and about judgment;
about sin, because they don't believe in me;
about righteousness, because I am going to my Father, and you won't see me any more;
about judgment, because the prince of this world has been judged.
'I have yet many things to tell you, but you can't bear them now.
However when he, the Spirit of truth, has come, he will guide you into all truth, for he will not speak from himself; but whatever he hears, he will speak. He will declare to you things that are coming.
He will glorify me, for he will take from what is mine, and will declare it to you.
All things whatever the Father has are mine; therefore I said that he takes of mine, and will declare it to you.
A little while, and you will not see me. Again a little while, and you will see me.'
Some of his disciples therefore said to one another, 'What is this that he says to us, 'A little while, and you won't see me, and again a little while, and you will see me;' and, 'Because I go to the Father?''
They said therefore, 'What is this that he says, 'A little while?' We don't know what he is saying.'
Therefore Jesus perceived that they wanted to ask him, and he said to them, 'Do you inquire among yourselves concerning this, that I said, 'A little while, and you won't see me, and again a little while, and you will see me?'
Most certainly I tell you, that you will weep and lament, but the world will rejoice. You will be sorrowful, but your sorrow will be turned into joy.
A woman, when she gives birth, has sorrow, because her time has come. But when she has delivered the child, she doesn't remember the anguish any more, for the joy that a human being is born into the world.
Therefore you now have sorrow, but I will see you again, and your heart will rejoice, and no one will take your joy away from you.
'In that day you will ask me no questions. Most certainly I tell you, whatever you may ask of the Father in my name, he will give it to you.
Until now, you have asked nothing in my name. Ask, and you will receive, that your joy may be made full.
I have spoken these things to you in figures of speech. But the time is coming when I will no more speak to you in figures of speech, but will tell you plainly about the Father.
In that day you will ask in my name; and I don't say to you, that I will pray to the Father for you,
for the Father himself loves you, because you have loved me, and have believed that I came forth from God.
I came out from the Father, and have come into the world. Again, I leave the world, and go to the Father.'
His disciples said to him, 'Behold, now you speak plainly, and speak no figures of speech.
Now we know that you know all things, and don't need for anyone to question you. By this we believe that you came forth from God.'
Jesus answered them, 'Do you now believe?
Behold, the time is coming, yes, and has now come, that you will be scattered, everyone to his own place, and you will leave me alone. Yet I am not alone, because the Father is with me.
I have told you these things, that in me you may have peace. In the world you have oppression; but cheer up! I have overcome the world.'
Now, brothers, concerning the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and our gathering together to him, we ask you
not to be quickly shaken in your mind, nor yet be troubled, either by spirit, or by word, or by letter as from us, saying that the day of Christ had come.
Let no one deceive you in any way. For it will not be, unless the departure comes first, and the man of sin is revealed, the son of destruction,
he who opposes and exalts himself against all that is called God or that is worshiped; so that he sits as God in the temple of God, setting himself up as God.
Don't you remember that, when I was still with you, I told you these things?
Now you know what is restraining him, to the end that he may be revealed in his own season.
For the mystery of lawlessness already works. Only there is one who restrains now, until he is taken out of the way.
Then the lawless one will be revealed, whom the Lord will kill with the breath of his mouth, and destroy by the manifestation of his coming;
even he whose coming is according to the working of Satan with all power and signs and lying wonders,
and with all deception of wickedness for those who are being lost, because they didn't receive the love of the truth, that they might be saved.
Because of this, God sends them a working of error, that they should believe a lie;
that they all might be judged who didn't believe the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness.
But we are bound to always give thanks to God for you, brothers loved by the Lord, because God chose you from the beginning for salvation through sanctification of the Spirit and belief in the truth;
to which he called you through our Good News, for the obtaining of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.
So then, brothers, stand firm, and hold the traditions which you were taught by us, whether by word, or by letter.
Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God our Father, who loved us and gave us eternal comfort and good hope through grace,
comfort your hearts and establish you in every good work and word.
Now there were some present at the same time who told him about the Galileans, whose blood Pilate had mixed with their sacrifices.
Jesus answered them, 'Do you think that these Galileans were worse sinners than all the other Galileans, because they suffered such things?
I tell you, no, but unless you repent, you will all perish in the same way.
Or those eighteen, on whom the tower in Siloam fell, and killed them; do you think that they were worse offenders than all the men who dwell in Jerusalem?
I tell you, no, but, unless you repent, you will all perish in the same way.'
He spoke this parable. 'A certain man had a fig tree planted in his vineyard, and he came seeking fruit on it, and found none.
He said to the vine dresser, 'Behold, these three years I have come looking for fruit on this fig tree, and found none. Cut it down. Why does it waste the soil?'
He answered, 'Lord, leave it alone this year also, until I dig around it, and fertilize it.
If it bears fruit, fine; but if not, after that, you can cut it down.''
He was teaching in one of the synagogues on the Sabbath day.
Behold, there was a woman who had a spirit of infirmity eighteen years, and she was bent over, and could in no way straighten herself up.
When Jesus saw her, he called her, and said to her, 'Woman, you are freed from your infirmity.'
He laid his hands on her, and immediately she stood up straight, and glorified God.
The ruler of the synagogue, being indignant because Jesus had healed on the Sabbath, said to the multitude, 'There are six days in which men ought to work. Therefore come on those days and be healed, and not on the Sabbath day!'
Therefore the Lord answered him, 'You hypocrites! Doesn't each one of you free his ox or his donkey from the stall on the Sabbath, and lead him away to water?
Ought not this woman, being a daughter of Abraham, whom Satan had bound eighteen long years, be freed from this bondage on the Sabbath day?'
As he said these things, all his adversaries were disappointed, and all the multitude rejoiced for all the glorious things that were done by him.
He said, 'What is the Kingdom of God like? To what shall I compare it?
It is like a grain of mustard seed, which a man took, and put in his own garden. It grew, and became a large tree, and the birds of the sky lodged in its branches.'
Again he said, 'To what shall I compare the Kingdom of God?
It is like yeast, which a woman took and hid in three measures of flour, until it was all leavened.'
He went on his way through cities and villages, teaching, and traveling on to Jerusalem.
One said to him, 'Lord, are they few who are saved?' He said to them,
'Strive to enter in by the narrow door, for many, I tell you, will seek to enter in, and will not be able.
When once the master of the house has risen up, and has shut the door, and you begin to stand outside, and to knock at the door, saying, 'Lord, Lord, open to us!' then he will answer and tell you, 'I don't know you or where you come from.'
Then you will begin to say, 'We ate and drank in your presence, and you taught in our streets.'
He will say, 'I tell you, I don't know where you come from. Depart from me, all you workers of iniquity.'
There will be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when you see Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and all the prophets, in the Kingdom of God, and yourselves being thrown outside.
They will come from the east, west, north, and south, and will sit down in the Kingdom of God.
Behold, there are some who are last who will be first, and there are some who are first who will be last.'
On that same day, some Pharisees came, saying to him, 'Get out of here, and go away, for Herod wants to kill you.'
He said to them, 'Go and tell that fox, 'Behold, I cast out demons and perform cures today and tomorrow, and the third day I complete my mission.
Nevertheless I must go on my way today and tomorrow and the next day, for it can't be that a prophet perish outside of Jerusalem.'
'Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that kills the prophets, and stones those who are sent to her! How often I wanted to gather your children together, like a hen gathers her own brood under her wings, and you refused!
Behold, your house is left to you desolate. I tell you, you will not see me, until you say, 'Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord!''
For you yourselves know, brothers, our visit to you wasn't in vain,
but having suffered before and been shamefully treated, as you know, at Philippi, we grew bold in our God to tell you the Good News of God in much conflict.
For our exhortation is not of error, nor of uncleanness, nor in deception.
But even as we have been approved by God to be entrusted with the Good News, so we speak; not as pleasing men, but God, who tests our hearts.
For neither were we at any time found using words of flattery, as you know, nor a cloak of covetousness (God is witness),
nor seeking glory from men (neither from you nor from others), when we might have claimed authority as apostles of Christ.
But we were gentle among you, like a nursing mother cherishes her own children.
Even so, affectionately longing for you, we were well pleased to impart to you, not the Good News of God only, but also our own souls, because you had become very dear to us.
For you remember, brothers, our labor and travail; for working night and day, that we might not burden any of you, we preached to you the Good News of God.
You are witnesses with God, how holy, righteously, and blamelessly we behaved ourselves toward you who believe.
As you know, we exhorted, comforted, and implored every one of you, as a father does his own children,
to the end that you should walk worthily of God, who calls you into his own Kingdom and glory.
For this cause we also thank God without ceasing, that, when you received from us the word of the message of God, you accepted it not as the word of men, but, as it is in truth, the word of God, which also works in you who believe.
For you, brothers, became imitators of the assemblies of God which are in Judea in Christ Jesus; for you also suffered the same things from your own countrymen, even as they did from the Jews;
who killed both the Lord Jesus and their own prophets, and drove us out, and didn't please God, and are contrary to all men;
forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles that they may be saved; to fill up their sins always. But wrath has come on them to the uttermost.
But we, brothers, being bereaved of you for a short season, in presence, not in heart, tried even harder to see your face with great desire,
because we wanted to come to you--indeed, I, Paul, once and again--but Satan hindered us.
For what is our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing? Isn't it even you, before our Lord Jesus at his coming?
For you are our glory and our joy.
He went out from there. He came into his own country, and his disciples followed him.
When the Sabbath had come, he began to teach in the synagogue, and many hearing him were astonished, saying, 'Where did this man get these things?' and, 'What is the wisdom that is given to this man, that such mighty works come about by his hands?
Isn't this the carpenter, the son of Mary, and brother of James, Joses, Judah, and Simon? Aren't his sisters here with us?' They were offended at him.
Jesus said to them, 'A prophet is not without honor, except in his own country, and among his own relatives, and in his own house.'
He could do no mighty work there, except that he laid his hands on a few sick people, and healed them.
He marveled because of their unbelief. He went around the villages teaching.
He called to himself the twelve, and began to send them out two by two; and he gave them authority over the unclean spirits.
He commanded them that they should take nothing for their journey, except a staff only: no bread, no wallet, no money in their purse,
but to wear sandals, and not put on two tunics.
He said to them, 'Wherever you enter into a house, stay there until you depart from there.
Whoever will not receive you nor hear you, as you depart from there, shake off the dust that is under your feet for a testimony against them.'
They went out and preached that people should repent.
They cast out many demons, and anointed many with oil who were sick, and healed them.
King Herod heard this, for his name had become known, and he said, 'John the Baptizer has risen from the dead, and therefore these powers are at work in him.'
But others said, 'He is Elijah.' Others said, 'He is a prophet, or like one of the prophets.'
But Herod, when he heard this, said, 'This is John, whom I beheaded. He has risen from the dead.'
For Herod himself had sent out and arrested John, and bound him in prison for the sake of Herodias, his brother Philip's wife, for he had married her.
For John said to Herod, 'It is not lawful for you to have your brother's wife.'
Herodias set herself against him, and desired to kill him, but she couldn't,
for Herod feared John, knowing that he was a righteous and holy man, and kept him safe. When he heard him, he did many things, and he heard him gladly.
Then a convenient day came, that Herod on his birthday made a supper for his nobles, the high officers, and the chief men of Galilee.
When the daughter of Herodias herself came in and danced, she pleased Herod and those sitting with him. The king said to the young lady, 'Ask me whatever you want, and I will give it to you.'
He swore to her, 'Whatever you shall ask of me, I will give you, up to half of my kingdom.'
She went out, and said to her mother, 'What shall I ask?' She said, 'The head of John the Baptizer.'
She came in immediately with haste to the king, and asked, I want you to give me right now the head of John the Baptizer on a platter.'
The king was exceedingly sorry, but for the sake of his oaths, and of his dinner guests, he didn't wish to refuse her.
Immediately the king sent out a soldier of his guard, and commanded to bring John's head, and he went and beheaded him in the prison,
and brought his head on a platter, and gave it to the young lady; and the young lady gave it to her mother.
When his disciples heard this, they came and took up his corpse, and laid it in a tomb.
The apostles gathered themselves together to Jesus, and they told him all things, whatever they had done, and whatever they had taught.
He said to them, 'You come apart into a deserted place, and rest awhile.' For there were many coming and going, and they had no leisure so much as to eat.
They went away in the boat to a deserted place by themselves.
They saw them going, and many recognized him and ran there on foot from all the cities. They arrived before them and came together to him.
Jesus came out, saw a great multitude, and he had compassion on them, because they were like sheep without a shepherd, and he began to teach them many things.
When it was late in the day, his disciples came to him, and said, 'This place is deserted, and it is late in the day.
Send them away, that they may go into the surrounding country and villages, and buy themselves bread, for they have nothing to eat.'
But he answered them, 'You give them something to eat.' They asked him, 'Shall we go and buy two hundred denarii worth of bread, and give them something to eat?'
He said to them, 'How many loaves do you have? Go see.' When they knew, they said, 'Five, and two fish.'
He commanded them that everyone should sit down in groups on the green grass.
They sat down in ranks, by hundreds and by fifties.
He took the five loaves and the two fish, and looking up to heaven, he blessed and broke the loaves, and he gave to his disciples to set before them, and he divided the two fish among them all.
They all ate, and were filled.
They took up twelve baskets full of broken pieces and also of the fish.
Those who ate the loaves were five thousand men.
Immediately he made his disciples get into the boat, and to go ahead to the other side, to Bethsaida, while he himself sent the multitude away.
After he had taken leave of them, he went up the mountain to pray.
When evening had come, the boat was in the midst of the sea, and he was alone on the land.
Seeing them distressed in rowing, for the wind was contrary to them, about the fourth watch of the night he came to them, walking on the sea, and he would have passed by them,
but they, when they saw him walking on the sea, supposed that it was a ghost, and cried out;
for they all saw him, and were troubled. But he immediately spoke with them, and said to them, 'Cheer up! It is I! Don't be afraid.'
He got into the boat with them; and the wind ceased, and they were very amazed among themselves, and marveled;
for they hadn't understood about the loaves, but their hearts were hardened.
When they had crossed over, they came to land at Gennesaret, and moored to the shore.
When they had come out of the boat, immediately the people recognized him,
and ran around that whole region, and began to bring those who were sick, on their mats, to where they heard he was.
Wherever he entered, into villages, or into cities, or into the country, they laid the sick in the marketplaces, and begged him that they might touch just the fringe of his garment; and as many as touched him were made well.
When he opened the seventh seal, there was silence in heaven for about half an hour.
I saw the seven angels who stand before God, and seven trumpets were given to them.
Another angel came and stood over the altar, having a golden censer. Much incense was given to him, that he should add it to the prayers of all the saints on the golden altar which was before the throne.
The smoke of the incense, with the prayers of the saints, went up before God out of the angel's hand.
The angel took the censer, and he filled it with the fire of the altar, and threw it on the earth. There followed thunders, sounds, lightnings, and an earthquake.
The seven angels who had the seven trumpets prepared themselves to sound.
The first sounded, and there followed hail and fire, mixed with blood, and they were thrown to the earth. One third of the earth was burnt up, and one third of the trees were burnt up, and all green grass was burnt up.
The second angel sounded, and something like a great burning mountain was thrown into the sea. One third of the sea became blood,
and one third of the living creatures which were in the sea died. One third of the ships were destroyed.
The third angel sounded, and a great star fell from the sky, burning like a torch, and it fell on one third of the rivers, and on the springs of the waters.
The name of the star is called 'Wormwood.' One third of the waters became wormwood. Many people died from the waters, because they were made bitter.
The fourth angel sounded, and one third of the sun was struck, and one third of the moon, and one third of the stars; so that one third of them would be darkened, and the day wouldn't shine for one third of it, and the night in the same way.
I saw, and I heard an eagle, flying in mid heaven, saying with a loud voice, 'Woe! Woe! Woe for those who dwell on the earth, because of the other voices of the trumpets of the three angels, who are yet to sound!'
Let us fear therefore, lest perhaps anyone of you should seem to have come short of a promise of entering into his rest.
For indeed we have had good news preached to us, even as they also did, but the word they heard didn't profit them, because it wasn't mixed with faith by those who heard.
For we who have believed do enter into that rest, even as he has said, 'As I swore in my wrath, they will not enter into my rest;' although the works were finished from the foundation of the world.
For he has said this somewhere about the seventh day, 'God rested on the seventh day from all his works;'
and in this place again, 'They will not enter into my rest.'
Seeing therefore it remains that some should enter therein, and they to whom the good news was before preached failed to enter in because of disobedience,
he again defines a certain day, today, saying through David so long a time afterward (just as has been said), 'Today if you will hear his voice, don't harden your hearts.'
For if Joshua had given them rest, he would not have spoken afterward of another day.
There remains therefore a Sabbath rest for the people of God.
For he who has entered into his rest has himself also rested from his works, as God did from his.
Let us therefore give diligence to enter into that rest, lest anyone fall after the same example of disobedience.
For the word of God is living, and active, and sharper than any two-edged sword, and piercing even to the dividing of soul and spirit, of both joints and marrow, and is able to discern the thoughts and intentions of the heart.
There is no creature that is hidden from his sight, but all things are naked and laid open before the eyes of him with whom we have to do.
Having then a great high priest, who has passed through the heavens, Jesus, the Son of God, let us hold tightly to our confession.
For we don't have a high priest who can't be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but one who has been in all points tempted like we are, yet without sin.
Let us therefore draw near with boldness to the throne of grace, that we may receive mercy, and may find grace for help in time of need.
Now the apostles and the brothers who were in Judea heard that the Gentiles had also received the word of God.
When Peter had come up to Jerusalem, those who were of the circumcision contended with him,
saying, 'You went in to uncircumcised men, and ate with them!'
But Peter began, and explained to them in order, saying,
'I was in the city of Joppa praying, and in a trance I saw a vision: a certain container descending, like it was a great sheet let down from heaven by four corners. It came as far as me.
When I had looked intently at it, I considered, and saw the four-footed animals of the earth, wild animals, creeping things, and birds of the sky.
I also heard a voice saying to me, 'Rise, Peter, kill and eat!'
But I said, 'Not so, Lord, for nothing unholy or unclean has ever entered into my mouth.'
But a voice answered me the second time out of heaven, 'What God has cleansed, don't you call unclean.'
This was done three times, and all were drawn up again into heaven.
Behold, immediately three men stood before the house where I was, having been sent from Caesarea to me.
The Spirit told me to go with them, without discriminating. These six brothers also accompanied me, and we entered into the man's house.
He told us how he had seen the angel standing in his house, and saying to him, 'Send to Joppa, and get Simon, whose surname is Peter,
who will speak to you words by which you will be saved, you and all your house.'
As I began to speak, the Holy Spirit fell on them, even as on us at the beginning.
I remembered the word of the Lord, how he said, 'John indeed baptized in water, but you will be baptized in the Holy Spirit.'
If then God gave to them the same gift as us, when we believed in the Lord Jesus Christ, who was I, that I could withstand God?'
When they heard these things, they held their peace, and glorified God, saying, 'Then God has also granted to the Gentiles repentance to life!'
They therefore who were scattered abroad by the oppression that arose about Stephen traveled as far as Phoenicia, Cyprus, and Antioch, speaking the word to no one except to Jews only.
But there were some of them, men of Cyprus and Cyrene, who, when they had come to Antioch, spoke to the Hellenists, preaching the Lord Jesus.
The hand of the Lord was with them, and a great number believed and turned to the Lord.
The report concerning them came to the ears of the assembly which was in Jerusalem. They sent out Barnabas to go as far as Antioch,
who, when he had come, and had seen the grace of God, was glad. He exhorted them all, that with purpose of heart they should remain near to the Lord.
For he was a good man, and full of the Holy Spirit and of faith, and many people were added to the Lord.
Barnabas went out to Tarsus to look for Saul.
When he had found him, he brought him to Antioch. It happened, that for a whole year they were gathered together with the assembly, and taught many people. The disciples were first called Christians in Antioch.
Now in these days, prophets came down from Jerusalem to Antioch.
One of them named Agabus stood up, and indicated by the Spirit that there should be a great famine all over the world, which also happened in the days of Claudius.
As any of the disciples had plenty, each determined to send relief to the brothers who lived in Judea;
which they also did, sending it to the elders by the hands of Barnabas and Saul.
Paul and Timothy, servants of Jesus Christ; To all the saints in Christ Jesus who are at Philippi, with the overseers:
Grace to you, and peace from God, our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.
I thank my God whenever I remember you,
always in every request of mine on behalf of you all making my requests with joy,
for your partnership in furtherance of the Good News from the first day until now;
being confident of this very thing, that he who began a good work in you will complete it until the day of Jesus Christ.
It is even right for me to think this way on behalf of all of you, because I have you in my heart, because, both in my bonds and in the defense and confirmation of the Good News, you all are partakers with me of grace.
For God is my witness, how I long after all of you in the tender mercies of Christ Jesus.
This I pray, that your love may abound yet more and more in knowledge and all discernment;
so that you may approve the things that are excellent; that you may be sincere and without offense to the day of Christ;
being filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are through Jesus Christ, to the glory and praise of God.
Now I desire to have you know, brothers, that the things which happened to me have turned out rather to the progress of the Good News;
so that it became evident to the whole praetorian guard, and to all the rest, that my bonds are in Christ;
and that most of the brothers in the Lord, being confident through my bonds, are more abundantly bold to speak the word of God without fear.
Some indeed preach Christ even out of envy and strife, and some also out of good will.
The former insincerely preach Christ from selfish ambition, thinking that they add affliction to my chains;
but the latter out of love, knowing that I am appointed for the defense of the Good News.
What does it matter? Only that in every way, whether in pretense or in truth, Christ is proclaimed. I rejoice in this, yes, and will rejoice.
For I know that this will turn out to my salvation, through your supplication and the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ,
according to my earnest expectation and hope, that I will in no way be disappointed, but with all boldness, as always, now also Christ will be magnified in my body, whether by life, or by death.
For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain.
But if I live on in the flesh, this will bring fruit from my work; yet I don't make known what I will choose.
But I am in a dilemma between the two, having the desire to depart and be with Christ, which is far better.
Yet, to remain in the flesh is more needful for your sake.
Having this confidence, I know that I will remain, yes, and remain with you all, for your progress and joy in the faith,
that your rejoicing may abound in Christ Jesus in me through my presence with you again.
Only let your manner of life be worthy of the Good News of Christ, that, whether I come and see you or am absent, I may hear of your state, that you stand firm in one spirit, with one soul striving for the faith of the Good News;
and in nothing frightened by the adversaries, which is for them a proof of destruction, but to you of salvation, and that from God.
Because it has been granted to you on behalf of Christ, not only to believe in him, but also to suffer on his behalf,
having the same conflict which you saw in me, and now hear is in me.
The high priest said, 'Are these things so?'
He said, 'Brothers and fathers, listen. The God of glory appeared to our father Abraham, when he was in Mesopotamia, before he lived in Haran,
and said to him, 'Get out of your land, and from your relatives, and come into a land which I will show you.'
Then he came out of the land of the Chaldaeans, and lived in Haran. From there, when his father was dead, God moved him into this land, where you are now living.
He gave him no inheritance in it, no, not so much as to set his foot on. He promised that he would give it to him for a possession, and to his seed after him, when he still had no child.
God spoke in this way: that his seed would live as aliens in a strange land, and that they would be enslaved and mistreated for four hundred years.
'I will judge the nation to which they will be in bondage,' said God, 'and after that will they come out, and serve me in this place.'
He gave him the covenant of circumcision. So Abraham became the father of Isaac, and circumcised him the eighth day. Isaac became the father of Jacob, and Jacob became the father of the twelve patriarchs.
'The patriarchs, moved with jealousy against Joseph, sold him into Egypt. God was with him,
and delivered him out of all his afflictions, and gave him favor and wisdom before Pharaoh, king of Egypt. He made him governor over Egypt and all his house.
Now a famine came over all the land of Egypt and Canaan, and great affliction. Our fathers found no food.
But when Jacob heard that there was grain in Egypt, he sent out our fathers the first time.
On the second time Joseph was made known to his brothers, and Joseph's race was revealed to Pharaoh.
Joseph sent, and summoned Jacob, his father, and all his relatives, seventy-five souls.
Jacob went down into Egypt, and he died, himself and our fathers,
and they were brought back to Shechem, and laid in the tomb that Abraham bought for a price in silver from the children of Hamor of Shechem.
'But as the time of the promise came close which God had sworn to Abraham, the people grew and multiplied in Egypt,
until there arose a different king, who didn't know Joseph.
The same took advantage of our race, and mistreated our fathers, and forced them to throw out their babies, so that they wouldn't stay alive.
At that time Moses was born, and was exceedingly handsome. He was nourished three months in his father's house.
When he was thrown out, Pharaoh's daughter took him up, and reared him as her own son.
Moses was instructed in all the wisdom of the Egyptians. He was mighty in his words and works.
But when he was forty years old, it came into his heart to visit his brothers, the children of Israel.
Seeing one of them suffer wrong, he defended him, and avenged him who was oppressed, striking the Egyptian.
He supposed that his brothers understood that God, by his hand, was giving them deliverance; but they didn't understand.
'The day following, he appeared to them as they fought, and urged them to be at peace again, saying, 'Sirs, you are brothers. Why do you wrong one another?'
But he who did his neighbor wrong pushed him away, saying, 'Who made you a ruler and a judge over us?
Do you want to kill me, as you killed the Egyptian yesterday?'
Moses fled at this saying, and became a stranger in the land of Midian, where he became the father of two sons.
'When forty years were fulfilled, an angel of the Lord appeared to him in the wilderness of Mount Sinai, in a flame of fire in a bush.
When Moses saw it, he wondered at the sight. As he came close to see, a voice of the Lord came to him,
'I am the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.' Moses trembled, and dared not look.
The Lord said to him, 'Take your sandals off of your feet, for the place where you stand is holy ground.
I have surely seen the affliction of my people that is in Egypt, and have heard their groaning. I have come down to deliver them. Now come, I will send you into Egypt.'
'This Moses, whom they refused, saying, 'Who made you a ruler and a judge?'--God has sent him as both a ruler and a deliverer by the hand of the angel who appeared to him in the bush.
This man led them out, having worked wonders and signs in Egypt, in the Red Sea, and in the wilderness for forty years.
This is that Moses, who said to the children of Israel, 'The Lord our God will raise up a prophet for you from among your brothers, like me.
This is he who was in the assembly in the wilderness with the angel that spoke to him on Mount Sinai, and with our fathers, who received living oracles to give to us,
to whom our fathers wouldn't be obedient, but rejected him, and turned back in their hearts to Egypt,
saying to Aaron, 'Make us gods that will go before us, for as for this Moses, who led us out of the land of Egypt, we don't know what has become of him.'
They made a calf in those days, and brought a sacrifice to the idol, and rejoiced in the works of their hands.
But God turned, and gave them up to serve the army of the sky, as it is written in the book of the prophets, 'Did you offer to me slain animals and sacrifices forty years in the wilderness, O house of Israel?
You took up the tabernacle of Moloch, the star of your god Rephan, the figures which you made to worship. I will carry you away beyond Babylon.'
'Our fathers had the tabernacle of the testimony in the wilderness, even as he who spoke to Moses commanded him to make it according to the pattern that he had seen;
which also our fathers, in their turn, brought in with Joshua when they entered into the possession of the nations, whom God drove out before the face of our fathers, to the days of David,
who found favor in the sight of God, and asked to find a habitation for the God of Jacob.
But Solomon built him a house.
However, the Most High doesn't dwell in temples made with hands, as the prophet says,
'heaven is my throne, and the earth a footstool for my feet. What kind of house will you build me?' says the Lord; 'or what is the place of my rest?
Didn't my hand make all these things?'
'You stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, you always resist the Holy Spirit! As your fathers did, so you do.
Which of the prophets didn't your fathers persecute? They killed those who foretold the coming of the Righteous One, of whom you have now become betrayers and murderers.
You received the law as it was ordained by angels, and didn't keep it!'
Now when they heard these things, they were cut to the heart, and they gnashed at him with their teeth.
But he, being full of the Holy Spirit, looked up steadfastly into heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of God,
and said, 'Behold, I see the heavens opened, and the Son of Man standing at the right hand of God!'
But they cried out with a loud voice, and stopped their ears, and rushed at him with one accord.
They threw him out of the city, and stoned him. The witnesses placed their garments at the feet of a young man named Saul.
They stoned Stephen as he called out, saying, 'Lord Jesus, receive my spirit!'
He kneeled down, and cried with a loud voice, 'Lord, don't hold this sin against them!' When he had said this, he fell asleep.
Jesus went out from the temple, and was going on his way. His disciples came to him to show him the buildings of the temple.
But he answered them, 'Don't you see all of these things? Most certainly I tell you, there will not be left here one stone on another, that will not be thrown down.'
As he sat on the Mount of Olives, the disciples came to him privately, saying, 'Tell us, when will these things be? What is the sign of your coming, and of the end of the age?'
Jesus answered them, 'Be careful that no one leads you astray.
For many will come in my name, saying, 'I am the Christ,' and will lead many astray.
You will hear of wars and rumors of wars. See that you aren't troubled, for all this must happen, but the end is not yet.
For nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom; and there will be famines, plagues, and earthquakes in various places.
But all these things are the beginning of birth pains.
Then they will deliver you up to oppression, and will kill you. You will be hated by all of the nations for my name's sake.
Then many will stumble, and will deliver up one another, and will hate one another.
Many false prophets will arise, and will lead many astray.
Because iniquity will be multiplied, the love of many will grow cold.
But he who endures to the end, the same will be saved.
This Good News of the Kingdom will be preached in the whole world for a testimony to all the nations, and then the end will come.
'When, therefore, you see the abomination of desolation, which was spoken of through Daniel the prophet, standing in the holy place (let the reader understand),
then let those who are in Judea flee to the mountains.
Let him who is on the housetop not go down to take out things that are in his house.
Let him who is in the field not return back to get his clothes.
But woe to those who are with child and to nursing mothers in those days!
Pray that your flight will not be in the winter, nor on a Sabbath,
for then there will be great oppression, such as has not been from the beginning of the world until now, no, nor ever will be.
Unless those days had been shortened, no flesh would have been saved. But for the sake of the chosen ones, those days will be shortened.
'Then if any man tells you, 'Behold, here is the Christ,' or, 'There,' don't believe it.
For there will arise false christs, and false prophets, and they will show great signs and wonders, so as to lead astray, if possible, even the chosen ones.
'Behold, I have told you beforehand.
If therefore they tell you, 'Behold, he is in the wilderness,' don't go out; 'Behold, he is in the inner chambers,' don't believe it.
For as the lightning flashes from the east, and is seen even to the west, so will be the coming of the Son of Man.
For wherever the carcass is, there is where the vultures gather together.
But immediately after the oppression of those days, the sun will be darkened, the moon will not give its light, the stars will fall from the sky, and the powers of the heavens will be shaken;
and then the sign of the Son of Man will appear in the sky. Then all the tribes of the earth will mourn, and they will see the Son of Man coming on the clouds of the sky with power and great glory.
He will send out his angels with a great sound of a trumpet, and they will gather together his chosen ones from the four winds, from one end of the sky to the other.
'Now from the fig tree learn this parable. When its branch has now become tender, and puts forth its leaves, you know that the summer is near.
Even so you also, when you see all these things, know that it is near, even at the doors.
Most certainly I tell you, this generation will not pass away, until all these things are accomplished.
Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will not pass away.
But no one knows of that day and hour, not even the angels of heaven, but my Father only.
'As the days of Noah were, so will be the coming of the Son of Man.
For as in those days which were before the flood they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the ship,
and they didn't know until the flood came, and took them all away, so will be the coming of the Son of Man.
Then two men will be in the field: one will be taken and one will be left;
two women grinding at the mill, one will be taken and one will be left.
Watch therefore, for you don't know in what hour your Lord comes.
But know this, that if the master of the house had known in what watch of the night the thief was coming, he would have watched, and would not have allowed his house to be broken into.
Therefore also be ready, for in an hour that you don't expect, the Son of Man will come.
'Who then is the faithful and wise servant, whom his lord has set over his household, to give them their food in due season?
Blessed is that servant whom his lord finds doing so when he comes.
Most certainly I tell you that he will set him over all that he has.
But if that evil servant should say in his heart, 'My lord is delaying his coming,'
and begins to beat his fellow servants, and eat and drink with the drunkards,
the lord of that servant will come in a day when he doesn't expect it, and in an hour when he doesn't know it,
and will cut him in pieces, and appoint his portion with the hypocrites. There is where the weeping and grinding of teeth will be.
